---
layout: default
title: evaluating digital scholarship | fredgibbs
---


## Digital + Scholarship: Towards New Review Criteria and Practices
It is clear that important scholarly advancements in the humanities are more frequently happening far outside traditional print publications and practices. Traditional peer review process have become woefully inadequate to deal with large and sophisticated interdisciplinary projects that might push boundaries of design, computer science, literature, and history, all at the same time. While most humanists can easily place traditional research results in the context of a larger body of scholarship, most would be hard-pressed to do the same for a painstakingly curated and refined dataset (which requires great subject expertise to assemble) that could revolutionize research in its field. As it stands, current evaluation criteria discriminate against scholars who are adapting and broadening humanities research, education, and outreach.

The book attempts to formulate a basis for how to evaluate new processes and forms of humanities scholarship. While the typical disciplinary considerations for what constitutes good scholarship will remain essential, they must be augmented by a rigorous foundation for evaluating the quality of work that spans disciplinary domains and incorporates visualizations, interfaces, databases, code, and data as crucial to the project. Both new forms and new uses of scholarship call for a new kind of humanities criticism that goes far beyond traditional scholarly conventions for peer review. In outlining how we can better evaluate emerging new forms of scholarly discourse and the values they embody, this book also encourages us to reconsider the values of the humanities and to re-imagine the nature of scholarship itself. In considering the changing forms and goals of scholarship and scholarly service, it takes the much-needed step of outlining rigorous definitions, theoretical frameworks, and fundamental values of humanities scholarship in the digital age, and how they might best fulfill the goals of the humanities in the twenty-first century.
