---
layout: default
title: projects | fredgibbs
---

# RESEARCH PROJECTS


## _Poison, Medicine, and Disease: Late Medieval and Early Modern Toxicology_
Most of my time energy of late has been directe currently finishing a very much non-digital manuscript (based on my dissertation), _Poison, Medicine, and Disease: Late Medieval and Early Modern Toxicology_, that explores late medieval and early modern medical debates about the nature of poison (_venenum_). This book presents an new history of pre-modern toxicology that outlines how many core concepts of modern toxicology were first developed in the late medieval and early modern periods. Drawing from an unusually wide range of medical and natural philosophical texts&#8211;especially treatises on poison, pharmacy, pharmacology, plague, and the nature of disease&#8211;this book explores a neglected but revealing ontological debate about the existence of a category of substance fundamentally harmful to the human body and the corresponding implications for medical theory and practice. My research has been particularly useful and innovative in the way that it reframes typical disciplinary histories. The history of toxicology scarcely mentions the long history of physicians' treatises on poison from the late medieval and early modern periods; the history of disease and contagion scarcely mentions poison as an important component to their story; the history of medicine in general has continually considered medical literature on poison as little more than practical handbooks about avoiding and treating cases of poisoning. My research has shown how integral the concept of poison was to these various disciplines. More broadly, it sheds new light on late medieval and early modern medical thinking about the nature of the human body and disease. For a more detailed overview, [[read a recent version of the Introduction](../extras/book-introduction.pdf)]


## Programming Historian
[_Programming Historian_](http://programminghistorian.org) offers novice-friendly, peer-reviewed tutorials that help humanists learn a wide range of digital tools, techniques, and workflows to facilitate their research. I have been a general editor since 2012. Since then I have edited roughly a half-dozen lessons. More importantly, in my opinion, I have focused my efforts on community building and developing a transparent and sustainable editorial process—anchored with free, open source tools and volunteer labor—that best facilitates the creation of peer-reviewed, high quality academic resources that are and will remain entirely free and open access. While our process is imperfect and continually evolving, it is no overstatement to say that our work provides a model for academic publishing that avoids the bloated costs and inaccessibility of most academic resources. [My description of our editorial values and process](http://dhcommons.org/journal/issue-1/editorial-sustainability-and-open-peer-review-programming-historian) was recently published in the inaugural issue of [DHCommons](http://dhcommons.org).


## Digital + Scholarship: Towards New Review Criteria and Practices
It is clear that important scholarly advancements in the humanities are more frequently happening far outside traditional print publications and practices. Traditional peer review process have become woefully inadequate to deal with large and sophisticated interdisciplinary projects that might push boundaries of design, computer science, literature, and history, all at the same time. While most humanists can easily place traditional research results in the context of a larger body of scholarship, most would be hard-pressed to do the same for a painstakingly curated and refined dataset (which requires great subject expertise to assemble) that could revolutionize research in its field. As it stands, current evaluation criteria discriminate against scholars who are adapting and broadening humanities research, education, and outreach.

The book attempts to formulate a basis for how to evaluate new processes and forms of humanities scholarship. While the typical disciplinary considerations for what constitutes good scholarship will remain essential, they must be augmented by a rigorous foundation for evaluating the quality of work that spans disciplinary domains and incorporates visualizations, interfaces, databases, code, and data as crucial to the project. Both new forms and new uses of scholarship call for a new kind of humanities criticism that goes far beyond traditional scholarly conventions for peer review. In outlining how we can better evaluate emerging new forms of scholarly discourse and the values they embody, this book also encourages us to reconsider the values of the humanities and to re-imagine the nature of scholarship itself. In considering the changing forms and goals of scholarship and scholarly service, it takes the much-needed step of outlining rigorous definitions, theoretical frameworks, and fundamental values of humanities scholarship in the digital age, and how they might best fulfill the goals of the humanities in the twenty-first century.


_Histories of the Future_ ([histscifi.com](http://histscifi.com))
This project was an experiment to see if a small academic workshop (on the history of science) could produce and make available a collection of scholarly work over a period of about a year in a web format that would encourage continuing contributions and be more visible than the results (and papers) from a typical academic workshop. I was responsible for designing and building the website, as well as migrating content to a sustainable web format and publishing the essays online. The project is still ongoing, but the editors (myself included) have been more distracted with traditional and necessary book projects than we anticipated, which has unfortunately dissipated energy from this project. But we are proud of what we produced as an experiment for making the work of a one-off workshop openly visible and available for specialists and non-specialists alike. 

## New Interfaces to Medieval Manuscripts
Any effort to connect manuscript catalogs faces numerable technical challenges that make it easy to get bogged down in capturing and connecting basic information about manuscripts. Such difficulties make it easy to consider the access to and visualization of manuscript metadata as secondary to creating the technical infrastructure itself. Consequently, even with advanced search features of digital catalogs, we end up using manuscript catalogs mostly in the same ways we have in printed books, missing out on new opportunities to connect and study medieval manuscripts at much larger scales.

I've begun work on a prototype project that will create a digital medieval archive with new possibilities to re-conceptualize the kinds of data we maintain, how we interact with it, and how we can create a much richer archive in the process. In particular, it pursues three principal goals: 

(1) An archive driven by linked open data will not only enable new research methodologies, but also will present new opportunities for exploration and discovery of manuscripts and their contents. But we must think carefully about how traditional interactions with bibliographic data may inadvertently limit possible research questions. In creating a new kind of manuscript archive, we must consider how metadata (and its inherent uncertainty) might be represented on maps, in network diagrams, and in other configurations that will require or benefit from metadata fields that have not traditionally been a part of manuscript catalog data. 

(2) Creative metadata visualization can help leverage scholarly expertise to continually correct and contribute to manuscript metadata, and therefore must be considered early on in the design process. Data deficiencies can thus be seen at a glance during the course of research, and help to distribute the work of simple error correction and the process of standardization across the community of experts rather than a few  (perhaps less expert) gatekeepers. 

(3) Visual catalog displays can make the process of metadata determination a much more open and transparent process. As the typical disciplinary distinctions between archivists, librarians, and research scholars become increasingly blurred, we must use digital catalogs that cross institutional and disciplinary boundaries to allow scholars to improve manuscript catalogs. This cannot be done anonymously but in a carefully controlled way we must augment typical metadata with historiographic metadata. The site of knowledge production must be much more open to specialists that can bring their expertise to improving data about manuscripts. 




# PREVIOUS PROJECTS

## Metadata Improvement VIA Mapping (MIVIAM)
Creating digital ad-hoc maps for historical research has never been easier, yet the historian faces a number of practical problems when visualizing data in space and time. Messy, non-standardized data as well as shifting historical placenames and political boundaries, to name just a few, complicate the process considerably. This project extends a prototype (initially funded by the Mellon Foundation) to make it even easier to map historical data and clean it up in the process. MIVIAM geolocates placenames and creates a KML file so that the information contained in the database can be readily mapped and visualized. More importantly, MIVIAM's rich user interface facilitates metadata correction by researchers. By allowing users to map specific sets of data--about which they have expertise--they can easily recognize and correct problems with metadata, thus improving their maps for individual research, but also making the data much more useful for everyone else at the same time. I've written a bit [more about the research team's experience](../posts/plants-places-and-metadata/).

## Reframing the Victorians
With funding from one of the twelve [Google Digital Humanities Grants](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/07/our-commitment-to-digital-humanities.html), Dan Cohen and I are exploring the massive corpus of Victorian literature held at Google Books in order to reevaluate and complicate the traditional stereotypical characterizations of the Victorians. The vast digital library of Google Books presents for the first time the possibility that we can conduct a comprehensive survey of Victorian writing—not just the well-known Mills and Carlyles, but tens of thousands of lesser-known or even forgotten authors—to see if the Victorians truly did use the kinds of words and phrases that Houghton in his seminal _The Victorian Frame of Mind_ thought were indicative of their character. Did metaphors of light actually increase in real terms between 1830 and 1870, or was this only true for the dozen prominent writers he chose to focus on in his chapter on optimism? Will a more complex picture emerge from the comprehensive index of Google Books as we study changing word use over time?

## Digging Into Data: Criminal Intent
The [Proceedings of the Old Bailey](http://oldbaileyonline.org) provide a glimpse into almost 200k trials at London’s central criminal court over a period of 240 years. Historians have tended to approach this collection by sifting through the documents one at a time, using unusual or compelling stories to illustrate social, cultural or intellectual histories. The [Criminal Intent](http://criminalintent.org) project demonstrates the potential roles for text mining in historical practice, showing that greater historical rigor can be achieved, and new insights gained, by moving from a single trial or narrow run of relevant examples to an analysis of statistically significant textual patterns found in this source as a single, massive whole. In addition to the Old Bailey Proceedings, our work builds on the successes of [Zotero](http://zotero.org) virtual collections, [TAPoR](http://portal.tapor.ca/portal/portal) and [Voyeur analytics](voyeurtools.org).

## ScholarPress
Most online education tools remain far too closed, proprietary, and complex for most of the essential tasks that scholars need to do on a daily basis. This project with create a suite of focused plug-ins for the ubiquitous blogging platform WordPress to help humanities teachers and researchers create syllabi, course websites, and display bibliographies. The primary goal is to provide freedom, flexibility, and a low-barrier to entry to using technology in teaching and research without the restrictions of monolithic, expensive, and proprietary software.
