---
layout: default
title: projects | fredgibbs
---

# RESEARCH PROJECTS

## Overview
My research interests range widely over the intersection of natural philosophy, medicine, and the human body during the medieval and early modern periods. I'm also interested in the circulation of medical knowledge in thirteenth through fifteenth centuries.


## "The venomes doo preserve from diseases"
I am currently finishing a manuscript that explores late medieval and early modern medical literature on poison. This book presents an new history of pre-modern toxicology that outlines how many of the concepts of modern toxicology were first developed in the late medieval and early modern periods. At its core, it explores how late medieval and early modern (c. 1250-1600) physicians discussed the relationship between poison, medicine, and disease. Drawing from an usually wide range of medical and natural philosophical texts&#8211;especially treatises on poison, pharmacy, pharmacology, plague, and the nature of disease&#8211;my research explores a neglected but revealing ontological debate about the existence of a category of substance fundamentally harmful to the human body and the corresponding implications for medical theory and practice. Focusing on the category of poison rather than on specific drugs fundamentally reframes the standard histories of pharmacology, toxicology and etiology, and provides a new perspective on how these disciplines (even when not formalized as such) interacted and shaped one another. More broadly, it sheds new light on late medieval and early modern medical thinking about the nature of the human body and how external material substances can affect it. [[read the full prospectus](../posts/medieval-and-early-modern-toxicology)]


## New Interfaces to Medieval Manuscripts
Any effort to connect manuscript catalogs faces numerable technical challenges that make it easy to get bogged down in capturing and connecting basic information about manuscripts. Such difficulties make it easy to consider the access to and visualization of the manuscript metadata as secondary to creating the technical infrastructure itself. Consequently, even with advanced search features of digital catalogs, we end up using manuscript catalogs mostly in the same ways we have in printed books, missing out on new opportunities to connect and study medieval manuscripts at much larger scales.

This project will create a digital medieval archive with new possibilities to re-conceptualize the kinds of data we maintain, how we interact with it, and how we can create a much richer archive in the process. In particular, it pursues three principal goals: 

(1) An archive driven by linked open data will not only enable new research methodologies, but also will present new opportunities for exploration and discovery of manuscripts and their contents. But we must think carefully about how traditional interactions with bibliographic data may inadvertently limit possible research questions. In creating a new kind of manuscript archive, we must consider how metadata (and its inherent uncertainty) might be represented on maps, in network diagrams, and in other configurations that will require or benefit from metadata fields that have not traditionally been a part of manuscript catalog data. 

(2) Creative metadata visualization can help leverage scholarly expertise to continually correct and contribute to manuscript metadata, and therefore must be considered early on in the design process. Data deficiencies can thus be seen at a glance during the course of research, and help to distribute the work of simple error correction and the process of standardization across the community of experts rather than a few  (perhaps less expert) gatekeepers. 

(3) Visual catalog displays can make the process of metadata determination a much more open and transparent process. As the typical disciplinary distinctions between archivists, librarians, and research scholars become increasingly blurred, we must use digital catalogs that cross institutional and disciplinary boundaries to allow scholars to improve manuscript catalogs. This cannot be done anonymously but in a carefully controlled way we must augment typical metadata with historiographic metadata. The site of knowledge production must be much more open to specialists that can bring their expertise to improving data about manuscripts. 

<!--
## Poison, Putrefaction, and the Ontology of Disease
As sixteenth-century medicine rapidly developed and assimilated new approaches to anatomy, medical botany, and iatrochemistry--and as Aristotelian thinking further influenced Renaissance medicine generally--physicians continually reformulated and reframed theoretical frameworks that explained the nature of disease, including its causation and dissemination. Although a vague relationship between corruption, putrefaction, and disease reached back to antiquity, putrefaction remained a slippery concept that comprised a range of processes: putrefied humors could refer simply to a complexional imbalance; a strong drug or poison might be said to putrefy the substance of the body; putrefied material might be the mechanism of contagion. Physicians worked to reconcile several unresolved theoretical tensions, as evidenced by a constellation of treatises by Girolamo Accoramboni, Thomas Erastus, and Arcangelo Mercenari, all of whom disputed each other about the nature of putrefaction and how to reconcile the discrepancies between Aristotle and Galen on the subject. I'm investigating how sixteenth-century medico-philosophers began to sharpen their conceptions of putrefaction and fermentation as they became more central to understanding early modern etiology and toxicology. How were putrefaction inside and outside the body related? Could a poison be generated inside the human body and then putrefy it? What were the difference between fermentation (the process by which compound drugs acquired their healing powers) and putrefaction? I also explore how questions about putrefaction also express a view of the ontology of disease.
-->

## Textual Traditions of _Materia Medica_
Scholars have long investigated pharmacopoeia, herbaria, and other lists of medicinal substances to understand pre-modern pharmacy and the nature of medical practice. Yet the challenges of locating and gathering these texts has meant that research has tended to focus on a few major and easily available texts, thus neglecting the wealth of individual and isolated manuscripts that are crucial for exposing regional differences in medical knowledge and practice. These texts are most valuable when studied comparatively and when composed from the broadest possible textual base. I hope to create a more accessible archive of these manuscripts to better facilitate such historical analysis by substantially lowering the barriers of access to manuscripts that are widely dispersed across European research libraries. A collective effort to increase the visibility and accessibility of these texts will help scholars working on early science and medicine understand how local knowledge of plants and their uses were influenced as texts traversed geographical, linguistic, and cultural boundaries. Even more broadly, the research enabled by such a collection of medical texts will exemplify how employing new methods in researching natural history can create a much more inclusive and comprehensive history than traditional practices have allowed.


## Plague Treatises from 20,000 feet
When physicians began producing treatises on pestilential disease in the middle of the fourteenth century, a new genre of medical writing began to reflect physicians understanding of disease, contagion, and public health. Scholars have approached subsets of these plague treatises from a variety of perspectives (social, religious, medical, demographic, economic). Out of necessity, these treatises have been approached through highly selective subsets of the larger genre. I'm curious what we can learn about this genre by taking a more comprehensive approach, namely applying text mining techniques to a large corpus of Latin plague treatises written between 1348 and 1600. In particular, I'm interested in sketching out some of the larger contours of the genre that can indicate more precisely how the language used to describe plague and pestilential disease changed over time, and the linguistic features of the prose. This is a highly experimental approach, challenged by an unstable medical terminology and linguistic variations. I expect, however, that even superficial results will provide interesting and complementary understandings of medical descriptions of plague and the stability, innovations, and deviations that occurred at various points.


## Medieval Knowledge Flows
As the Greco-Arabic learned tradition was eagerly translated into Latin via several key translation centers over the tenth and eleventh centuries, it spread rapidly through burgeoning universities and other centers of learning. New textual discoveries and intellectual frameworks fueled knowledge production at increasing rates. Scholars of early universities, intellectual historians, and anyone interested in the transfer of knowledge and knowledge networks have asked many questions about the big picture of late medieval learning. But traditional scholarship tends to disperse and confine its analysis of libraries, university statutes, and individual scholars to rather inaccessible scholarly monographs. As a result, we really have no bird's-eye view of textual transmission during this crucial period of intellectual growth that was foundational for the development of the modern West. This projects creates an open access archive of this data in an attempt to connect the records we have of when manuscripts existed a certain places and times to facilitate research about knowledge transfer in the late Middle Ages.


#PREVIOUS PROJECTS

## Reframing the Victorians
With funding from one of the twelve [Google Digital Humanities Grants](http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/07/our-commitment-to-digital-humanities.html), Dan Cohen and I are exploring the massive corpus of Victorian literature held at Google Books in order to reevaluate and complicate the traditional stereotypical characterizations of the Victorians. The vast digital library of Google Books presents for the first time the possibility that we can conduct a comprehensive survey of Victorian writing—not just the well-known Mills and Carlyles, but tens of thousands of lesser-known or even forgotten authors—to see if the Victorians truly did use the kinds of words and phrases that Houghton in his seminal _The Victorian Frame of Mind_ thought were indicative of their character. Did metaphors of light actually increase in real terms between 1830 and 1870, or was this only true for the dozen prominent writers he chose to focus on in his chapter on optimism? Will a more complex picture emerge from the comprehensive index of Google Books as we study changing word use over time?

## Metadata Improvement VIA Mapping (MIVIAM)
Creating digital ad-hoc maps for historical research has never been easier, yet the historian faces a number of practical problems when visualizing data in space and time. Messy, non-standardized data as well as shifting historical placenames and political boundaries, to name just a few, complicate the process considerably. This project extends a prototype (initially funded by the Mellon Foundation) to make it even easier to map historical data and clean it up in the process. MIVIAM geolocates placenames and creates a KML file so that the information contained in the database can be readily mapped and visualized. More importantly, MIVIAM's rich user interface facilitates metadata correction by researchers. By allowing users to map specific sets of data--about which they have expertise--they can easily recognize and correct problems with metadata, thus improving their maps for individual research, but also making the data much more useful for everyone else at the same time. I've written a bit [more about the research team's experience](../posts/plants-places-and-metadata/).

## Digging Into Data: Criminal Intent
The [Proceedings of the Old Bailey](http://oldbaileyonline.org) provide a glimpse into almost 200k trials at London’s central criminal court over a period of 240 years. Historians have tended to approach this collection by sifting through the documents one at a time, using unusual or compelling stories to illustrate social, cultural or intellectual histories. The [Criminal Intent](http://criminalintent.org) project demonstrates the potential roles for text mining in historical practice, showing that greater historical rigor can be achieved, and new insights gained, by moving from a single trial or narrow run of relevant examples to an analysis of statistically significant textual patterns found in this source as a single, massive whole. In addition to the Old Bailey Proceedings, our work builds on the successes of [Zotero](http://zotero.org) virtual collections, [TAPoR](http://portal.tapor.ca/portal/portal) and [Voyeur analytics](voyeurtools.org).

## ScholarPress
Most online education tools remain far too closed, proprietary, and complex for most of the essential tasks that scholars need to do on a daily basis. This project with create a suite of focused plug-ins for the ubiquitous blogging platform WordPress to help humanities teachers and researchers create syllabi, course websites, and display bibliographies. The primary goal is to provide freedom, flexibility, and a low-barrier to entry to using technology in teaching and research without the restrictions of monolithic, expensive, and proprietary software.
