---
layout: post
title:  Poison, Medicine, and Disease
date:   2013-04-17 00:00:00
categories: [post, poison]
---

This is a synopsis for my first manuscript tentatively titled _The Venomes Doo Cure the Diseases: Poison, Medicine, and Disease in Late Medieval and Early Modern Europe_


### Project Description

This book presents an new history of pre-modern toxicology that outlines how many of the concepts of modern toxicology were first developed in the late medieval and early modern periods. At its core, it explores how late medieval and early modern (c. 1250-1600) physicians discussed the relationship between poison, medicine, and disease. Drawing from an usually wide range of medical and natural philosophical texts&#8211;especially treatises on poison, pharmacy, pharmacology, plague, and the nature of disease&#8211;my research explores a neglected but revealing ontological debate about the existence of a category of substance fundamentally harmful to the human body and the corresponding implications for medical theory and practice. Focusing on the category of poison rather than on specific drugs fundamentally reframes the standard histories of pharmacology, toxicology and etiology, and provides a new perspective on how these disciplines (even when not formalized as such) interacted and shaped one another. More broadly, it sheds new light on late medieval and early modern medical thinking about the nature of the human body and how external material substances can affect it. 

Certainly, mystery and danger spring to mind at even the mere mention of poison. It is no surprise, then, that the history of poison has easily captivated its audience with scandalous tales of covert assassinations and unscrupulous political aspirations. As a result, the history of poison&#8211;invariably linked to the barbaric &#8220;Dark Ages&#8221; and the quick hands of the Borgias&#8211;has been presented anecdotally as a history of poisonings, with relatively little attention to the concept of poison itself. Such histories, however, errantly assume poison to be relatively well-defined category of substance&#8211;conceptually antithetical to medicine&#8211;and often implicitly defined by modern quantitative measures, such as toxicity and lethal dose. While it certainly can be looked at this way, such a tidy formulation obscures the variety and latitude of conceptions that late medieval and early modern physicians vigorously debated. It hides, most egregiously, the ways physicians created a new kind of toxicology to separate medicines from poisons and to investigate the role of toxins in disease causation and transmission. To be sure, the history of poison is far richer than its role as an enigmatic murder weapon. The ways physicians struggled to understand the relationship between poison and other classes of substances in the world (like medicine and food) provide new perspectives on both theoretical and practical medicine of the late medieval and early modern periods.

My focus on the concept of poison complicates and complements previous historical work that has addressed poison primarily as an unproblematic and unambiguous label that was used uniformly throughout both medical and literary texts. It explores the broader questions that flummoxed physicians, such as how various substances should or should not be defined in terms of their interaction with the human body, as well as processes of harm, including the origin and spread of disease as well as processes of corruption and putrefaction inside the human body. Perhaps the best way to summarize the key themes of this book is to invoke the constellation of interesting questions that physicians debated: Is there a category of substance that is fundamentally detrimental to the body in all circumstances? Is there a defining feature that can distinguish between food, medicine, and poison? What does a poison actually do to the human body? If a body becomes poisoned, is that property of poisonous-ness transferrable to other bodies? These kinds of questions both addressed and provoked much larger philosophical concerns as well. Medical humanists of the sixteenth century found themselves reconciling the ancient Greek notion of pharmakon with the more contemporary Latin venenum, even though they derived from fundamentally different philosophical frameworks. These debates were not purely theoretical machinations, but pursued entirely practical questions. What is the role of poison in the cause and spread of disease? In times of illness, to what extent should therapeutics focus on removing a poison from the body rather than rebalancing it?

Physicians rarely agreed on answers to these questions, but their answers are less interesting than how they introduced such questions and the iterations of their expositions. This book breaks new ground in the way it embraces the inherent difficulties and ambiguities of these questions to provide a unique window onto the rapidly shifting medical theories about medicine, poison, and disease in the late medieval and early modern periods. 

### Competition &#038; Market

A few books on the history of poison approach the topic anecdotally, focusing almost exclusively on the crime of poison rather than medical conceptions of it. Recent examples include Franck Collard, Le crime de poison au Moyen Age (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2003); Georges Minois, Le couteau et le poison: l&#8217;assassinat politique en Europe (1400-1800) (Paris: Fayard, 1997); John Mann, Murder, Magic and Medicine (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994); Jean de Maleissye, Histoire du poison (Paris: F. Bourin, 1991). Several scholarly monographs have dealt more explicitly with meanings of poison in literary contexts, such as Tanya Pollard, Drugs and Theater in Early Modern England (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005); Jonathan Gil Harris, Foreign Bodies and the Body Politic: Discourses of Social Pathology in Early Modern England (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1998); Margaret Hallissy, Venomous Woman: Fear of the Female in Literature (New York: Greenwood Press, 1987). As valuable as these works are for their literary analyses, they do not consider the variety of medical debates around the notion of poison, nor do they not situate the notion of poison in broader themes in the history of science and medicine. Most disconcertingly, from a historian&#8217;s point of view, they often errantly portray literary depictions of poison as representative of medical understandings of poison. My book provides a much needed complementary analysis to these studies. Other scholarship that addresses related issues in toxicology and medical pharmacy appears only in highly specialized journal articles that usually privilege textual criticism over historical analysis, and thus tends to lose the forest for the trees. Although my book draws from and complements a wide range of scholarship, there is nothing like its broad analysis of how physicians understood and debated the concept of poison and the implications of these discussion on medicine more broadly.

### Audience

I expect that the book will appeal to anyone interested in the histories of toxicology and disease. For both a general audience and specialists, I offer a new history of toxicology that emphasizes how physicians first began to formulate and refine definitions of poison and toxicity in the late Middle Ages and continued to debate and refine their views throughout the sixteenth century. For those interested in epidemics, disease, and contagion, my research shows how important the concept of poison was to physicians who struggled to explain origin and transmission of epidemic diseases. Yet even the most specialized audiences will find innovative research and analysis on the role of poison in medical thinking, especially how physicians used the case of poison to better understand the processes of change inside the human body. My analysis of physicians&#8217; arguments about the definition of poison, the nature of poisonous properties, and its interaction with in the body will be useful to historians of medicine and science interested in the how the fields toxicology, pharmacology, and etiology have overlapped and informed each other far more than has been recognized. It also contributes to broader scholarly discussions on topics, like matter theory and the occult, for example, for which the concept poison was often a central point of inquiry. My emphasis on medical conceptions of poison will be tremendously useful for scholars working in other disciplines as well, especially literary scholars whose source material deals with poisons or dangerous drugs, especially since the medical and literary descriptions of poisons can stand dramatically far apart. 

### Introduction

I begin by explaining how my approach that focuses on how physicians discussed poison is far more revealing that the typical histories of poison that either consider it as little more than an enigmatic murder weapon, or assume texts about poison to be principally lists of dangerous substances and remedies for them. I outline in broad strokes what we can learn about medical theory from the perspective of poison, which has not been examined either systematically or comprehensively. The bulk of the introduction provides chapter synopses.

### Chapter 1: Classical Authorities and Traditions

In order to highlight the innovation of late medieval and early modern approaches to poison, the first chapter examines how classical Greek and later Arabic treatises on poison were direct but discretely different predecessors of the poison texts of the Latin tradition. Drawing from the original texts and numerous specialized studies of Greek and Arabic toxicology, I provide an overall picture and trajectory of how medical authorities discussed poison and the contexts in which they did so. I highlight the ambiguous nature of both pharmakon and venenum in the tradition of classical medicine that later Latin physicians would gradually transform; I also introduce the key texts and theoretical developments that were most influential for later authors. I argue that classical medical texts (and texts based primarily on them)&#8211;in contrast to their late medieval and early modern successors&#8211;focused primarily on cases of poisoning as opposed to the substance of poison itself, and thus challenge the typical assumptions of continuity.

### Chapter 2: The Emergence of Poison in the Latin West

The second chapter outlines new concerns and discussions about poison that developed in the Latin West over the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, especially how physicians explicitly endeavored to craft a distinction between medicine and poison. Paris, Padua, and Montpellier became especially important foci for the development of medical theory as Latin scholars became acquainted with and integrated Aristotelian natural philosophy, Galenic medicine, and valuable Arabic commentaries. At the same time, physicians, apothecaries, and drug-peddlers gained access to exotic ingredients from expanding trade routes and exploration, making proper preparation of complex drugs considerably more difficult and hazardous for patients. As a result, various legislative efforts banned the inclusion of certain poisons and strong drugs in remedies. But what was the difference between a dangerous drug, a poisonous medicine, or an absolute poison? I illustrate how one of the liveliest discussions addressed theories of drug action, and how the extent to which poison ought to be understood and defined by its &#8220;total substance&#8221; or &#8220;specific form,&#8221; which foreshadows debates on matter theory usually discussed in the context of the sixteenth century.

### Chapter 3: Towards a New Toxicology

The third chapter describes the emergence of standalone Latin treatises on poison and what makes them unique and distinctive&#8211;namely their increasing emphasis on theoretical understandings of poison and how it interacts with the body as a material object. Although one can trace a continuous presence of poison remedies in medical literature from the earliest medical records to the present, I argue that a new kind of toxicology emerged in the early fourteenth century by treatises from several prominent physicians and philosophers, such as the famous Paduan physicians and philosopher Pietro d&#8217;Abano, who encouraged the development of a genre of medical text that focused on natural philosophical discussions of the nature of poison. Although a few theoretically minded physicians, such as Galen and Avicenna, had offered abbreviated causal explanations, no systematic effort to understand the causal mechanisms behind poison surfaced before the fourteenth century. I show how later texts on poison gradually expanded sets of concerns about the nature of poison. I also explore how conservative treatises on practical medicine came to consider poison in novel ways, further demonstrating that the nature of poison had become an interesting topic in its own right.

### Chapter 4: Plague as Poison

The fourth chapter argues that the so-called Black Death (c. 1348-50) spurred physicians to reconsider the relationship between poison and disease, with the result that physicians further separated poison from medicine. Not only did physicians describe the cause of pestilence as a poison in the air (essentially a miasmatic view), they also described the cause of pestilential disease (the resulting fever and symptoms) as a poison inside the body&#8211;a novel conceptual move within medical texts. Such efforts forced physicians to rethink antecedent causes, as was the case when some fourteenth-century physicians writing about pestilential disease began to emphasize the causal aspect of the innate powers of substances more than humoral imbalances to explain the operation of exceptionally strong drugs and so-called poisons. For many physicians, treating pestilential disease came to mean treating a material poison that had come inside the body. I show how late fourteenth-century physicians developed new interests in poisonous bodies and processes by which poison could move around the environment&#8211;thus further illustrating how the idea of poison played an increasingly significant role in physicians&#8217; understanding of the nature of disease.

### Chapter 5: Poisonous Properties, Bodies, and Forms

The fifth chapter focuses on the rapidly shifting definitions, categories, and properties of poison&#8211;especially how physicians endeavored to define and describe the essence of poison according to a increasingly wide range of natural phenomena. Focused on the fifteenth century, it shows, for instance, how physicians thoroughly explored the implications of defining a substance like poison by what they termed its &#8220;specific form.&#8221; Yet if poison had unique form, then that form must have specific properties&#8211;but what were they? Drawing equally on practical experience and theoretical speculation, physicians debated a range of properties that poison might have, such as whether poison could be spread by sight, whether multiplication of species was necessary for the spread of poison, and whether poison could act as nourishment. Especially if there were different kinds of poisons, what did a &#8220;poisonous&#8221; property refer to? I explore how the emphasis on poisonous properties had implications for curing poison, as exemplified by the way physicians increasingly discussed the sympathy and antipathy of poison and its remedies, and how such analysis helped reshape medical thinking about disease. This chapter also highlights distinctions between cultural and medical invocations and discussions of poison. For example, although it has become common to assume that accusations and writings about witchcraft, sorcery, and the &#8220;evil eye&#8221; reveal medical understandings of poison, I argue here that these kinds of descriptions of poison and poisoning remained distinctly separate.  

### Chapter 6: Poisonous Disease

The sixth and final chapter focuses on understandings of poison against the backdrop of medical humanism and the debates over what have become known as &#8220;chemical medicines&#8221; throughout the sixteenth century. It describes how physicians reconciled their contemporary Latin medical literature and approaches to understanding poison with classical Greek medical texts&#8211;which were thought to be intellectually superior, yet did not explicitly discuss the nature of poison. I show how physicians gradually solidified the notion of poison as a category of substance as theoretically distinct from medicine (a fourteenth-century development), even while they dissolved any absolute practical separation between them (the typical classical approach). To trace the contradictory development of these trends, I investigate the universals and particulars of poison as they appear in three separate but interrelated contexts. I first consider how some physicians argued that a poison (powered by its specific form) was in fact the ultimate cause of virulent and contagious diseases (like plague and syphilis). Rather than an internal humoral balance of poison that caused disease, it was an external, material substance that entered into the body and needed to be removed. I also examine the conceptions of poison as they appear in debates about the kinds of substances allowable in medical pharmacy, especially in the development of chemical remedies, in which there was said to be a poison that must be separated from it. In the last section, I describe how physicians further reshaped their thinking and writing about poison, especially in the way they began to move away from establishing specific definitions of poison in favor of canvassing the broad away of ways in which poison could harm the body&#8211;thus moving toward what might be considered modern toxicology.

### Conclusion

My parting comments synthesize the broader themes raised across the individual chapters, especially how the book offers a new history of pre-modern toxicology anchored the broad natural philosophical framework behind physicians&#8217; conceptions of poison. I highlight the larger contours of how physicians&#8217; conception and discussion of poison changed over time and the motivations for such changes, such as epidemic disease, urbanization, medical professionalization, and pharmaceutical techniques. I also briefly survey the rapidly changing nature of poison texts towards the close of the sixteenth century in the face of rapidly changing medical theoretical frameworks that began to reshape the genre of literature&#8211;and thus provides a logical terminus for my study.
