In a much-needed effort to encourage and promote facility of new media among its attendees, the most recent American Association for the History of Medicine annual meeting (Chicago, 2014) held a screening of video shorts (complete with an old-timey popcorn machine). Having wanted to play around with video editing for some time, I could hardly resist this legitimization of my procrastination.

In the conversation that followed the screenings of selected videos (the room was packed and lined with people standing along the sides and back), it was clear that one reason scholars hadn’t embraced the video was that it was too foreign, too technical, and too outside the boundaries of the historical profession. One mentioned that writing is better because it has sophistication and nuance. The technology was simply too time consuming, the payoff too uncertain.

My own hubris and ineptitude prevent me from shying away from digital challenges, so I was not intimiated by the prospect of learning new software or techniques. To my surprise, figuring out the content and story of my video, something I thought I could do well having worked with the material for, say, the last decade, was actually far, far more difficult.

The intent here is to outline a general strategy for creating a narrated slide-show voice-over, a low barrier of entry far less daunting than thinking of creating a full-on movie. It’s not the only approach; it’s not the best; and in fact it might not be very good at all. The hope is to show that conceptualizing and executing the technical bits is actually quite straightforward. And that one of the key virtues of this kid fo project, is the benefit it brings to facilitating broader dissemination of humanities scholarship.

##The Software
Keynote: Without animation skills or software or time to learn something totally new before the submission deadline, I went with what I already knew. My whole “movie” is little more than a narrated slideshow.

Camtasia: Very good software for creating screencasts and editing them. I used the free trial. 

Although I used Keynote, which is obviously exclusively for OS X, nothing in this procedure is unqiue to either Keynote or the Mac; rather, it outlines a general strategy that could be used with any combintation of software or operating system.

##The Ingredients
Within Keynote (though, again, not unique to it; Powerpoint works similarly), two kinds of animation were used:

1) Basic slide-to-slide transition effects: I was constantly fighting the urge to use more effects; Every time i experimented with some, the video looked increasingly like a slide show with lots of random effects. You know, the kind that says: “I don’t know how to design a slide show, so I’m going to use all the effects to look sophisticated." The fewer and simpler kinds of effects gave it more of a documentary style.

2) Basic inter-slide animation functionality via the Build Order window. Set up a bunch of “events” like something fading in, out, or moving. This drives all the animations, such as the snake bite. Again, this si something built-in to almost all major presentation software.
 
3) Videos of handwriting: One additional animation effects appears twice, the handdrawn slides. For this I used Doceri on an iPad, which allows you to record drawings (like you writing on the tablet screen) and export them as movies, which you can simply import/insert and play as part of the slide presentation. You need to practice writing super duper fast!! Actually, no. Before embedding these into the slideshow, I imported these into Camtasia, increased their playback speed, and resaved as a compressed video file that I could simply drop into a slide for playback during the slidshow. At first I really did try writing really fast, but it didn’t take long to realize there was no possible way to write as quickly as I needed to (these are short videos; 15 seconds to watch handwriting is a bit ridiculous) and still write clearly (as I can barely write legibly at a slow speed). The speed adjustments possible through the video editing software make it easy to fit the video into the timing of the voice narration as well (more on that later).

##Planning your video
I had a time budget: 3 videos; 3 minutes each. Though I never would have voluntarily followed such a scheme, this was a great thing. When I was frustrated that I couldn’t say more, it helped to remind myself the whole goal was to say less. I wrote captions for slides and things to say during transitions. In order to stick to allotted presentation times in conferences and so on, I have gotten used to practicing my talks and adjusting them for timing. But never was I writing out a script to stick to a specific timeline, but just getting a feel for how fast to go and training myself not to ramble. 

Most of my initial run-thrus of slides and narration that i thought would be 3 minutes was closer to 6. It was humbling and then frustrating and then infuriating to see how many of the words on a page needed to come off the page in order to fit in the video. This also made me get very clear about what was most significant and interesting about my research in a way that even writing a short abstract had not.  But because you have both a visual and audio component, the video is potentially far more informative that the typical abstract or elevator speech.

Yes, it elides some nuance and sophistication. Please remember that people who want to bathe in your painstaking research and effortless prose will buy your book. The other 99.99% of the world would rather watch the 3 minute video and get the non-nuanced and simplified version; some of those will in turn want the longer, printed version. This is not about choosing a medium, it’s about choosing accessibility.

##Creating the initial voiceover
My initial plan was to play the Keynote presentation back on the screen and talk into the microphone while controlling the slides and animations launches with the keyboard as one normally would during a presentation. I thought I would simply record the presentation with the functionality built into Keynote. Keynote makes it easy to record presentations—you simply play the slideshow with [wait for it…] “Record Slideshow”.

However, this proved less than ideal for me. Playing or recording the slideshow means Keynote necessarily and unalterably goes into full screen mode, and there is nothing you can do about that. This means not having notes visible. I tried to print out notes to avoid needing the screen, but because I ended up revising the script constantly (quite literally during many afternoons), having to print out new versions each time I wanted to record was really annoying and I started to think there was a small section of a forest somewhere being bulldozed specifically for my script revisions.

My next plan that worked well, if not ideally, was to export the presentation as a movie, play it back in a smaller window, and screen capture that window as it was playing. This is especially good if working on a large screen; at least in my case, the video (particularly animations and other transition effects) screen-captured from full screen mode was quite choppy, whereas capturing the smaller window provided much smoother playback. 

It did not work out that I could simply play the slide show back and narrate over it, as I constantly needed to start and stop the video to keep (or try to keep) the narration and animation in sync. Starting and stopping the movie as a way of maintaining syncronicity seems oddly lo-tech, but its remarkably effective. If you say something wrong, you can simply pause the playback, repeat what you just flubbed, then continue on with the script. It will be easy to snip out the mistake later and line up the audio and video. However, there are of course times when you are trying to say something cleverly in sync with a particular animation; if you mess up, you simply have to replay that part of the video and re-speak the lines. You’ll be screen capturing you replaying the video, but it’s still easy later to snip those bits out of the screencast and put them in your bleeper reel.

You’ll notice that your sound quality is infinitely higher with a microphone to do the recording; the cheapest headset model with a mic is fine; it still does a great job of minizing ambient noise, especially avoiding the sounds producted by anytthing connected to your computer or desk, like using the keyboard.

##Refinement
It’s pretty exhilarating to see your “movie” start to take shape even when only a rough cut. But it’s also obvious that your initial voice over won’t exactly resemble those polished intro and tutorial videos that you’ve thought of as you planned your own.

To improve the first rough draft that you have, you can import your screen casts into Camtasia by dragging and dropping. A few minutes of experimental clicking will make it clear how to split the video and audio so that you can edit them indepedently. Right-click to “split at playhead” at the beginning and ending of what you want to cut. highlight it. delete it. 

If you’ve never done any digital editing before, video editing software gives you immediately a new sense of power because you can see that it’s not very hard to do whatever you want to do. It’s not easy to know what to do, but that’s a different problem. My approach was to chomp off the obvious audio or video detritus, where I had simply repeated a passage for a cleaner articulation, or had a long pause that I needed to eliminate, or when gesticulated into my microphone, or swore at the people making noise outside of my office. Low hanging fruit, as it were.

Creating a good narration is a balance of doing it well in large chunks to maintain continuity, and editing bits that turn out sub-optimally. Too much editing, and the soundtrack becomes distractingly unnatural, as the volume and tone won’t match perfectly from one take to the text, unless of course you’ve perfected your syrupy radio voice. You can massage the soundbites somewhat, but it’s sometimes easier to simply re-record a larger section so that you have less stitching to do.

##Ending
Like any academic project, time always seems to run our before perfection take hold. It was hard to be done with the project, despite the fact I was getting further behind in my usual work. The more you know, the more you can do, and the more you can dream up. A little imagination and a little technical futzing can go a long, long way.