---
layout: course 
title: History of Early Medicine | HIST 300-009 | Fall 2013
date: 2013-08-12 00:00:01
category: course 
---

Fred Gibbs ("fwgibbs@unm.edu":mailto:fwgibbs@unm.edu)
Mesa Vista Hall, 1077
Office Hours: M 11-12; T 2-4
Syllabus online at "http://fredgibbs.net/history-of-early-medicine":http://fredgibbs.net/history-of-early-medicine

This course chronologically explores the wide range of theories and practices employed by pre-modern physicians and healers. It emphasizes their various approaches to understanding and treating disease and the gradual development of the medical profession. Although medieval and early modern medicine can seem utterly irrelevant to today's world, this course illustrates how a historical awareness of medicine gives us important perspectives on contemporary medical practices. Even more broadly, the course provide synthetic and interpretive frameworks for understanding the evolution of western medicine over time, such as how shifting social and cultural values have motivated (and continue to motivate) change in medicine. The emphasis shall always remain on showing how and why medical theory and practice looked like it did rather than simply regurgitating what happened over time.


h2. Student Learning Outcomes

* Understand the overall chronological and thematic trajectory of pre-modern medicine, approaching it from multiple points of view (theory, practice, disease, doctors, patients, etc.).

* Discuss and write critically about how medicine and medical values are influenced by shifting cultural, social, religious, and political attitudes. 

* Reflect on and evaluating contemporary medical culture using the historical perspectives and analytical frameworks provided by the course.

* Critically evaluate contemporary medical writing (newspaper and magazine articles) to explicate the assumptions and values baked into modern medical thinking and its discourse.


h2. Course Expectations and Grading

* 50% of your grade is from class participation; 50% is from written work.

* Participation component is based on preparedness for and engagement with the class discussion. You do not have to talk all the time to do well. You need to ask good questions, give good answers to questions, and generally *be active*. Aim for quality over quantity. If you talk a lot, you're probably just diluting your good ideas. If you don't talk at all, you will seriously compromise your grade. (45%)

* You will also give one topic introduction, which means getting up in front of the class, summarizing the assigned reading and asking interesting questions about the text and how it fits into the course (~10 mins.) and generally being our discussion leader. (5%)

* There are 3 written assignments (due dates are indicated on the reading schedule below): 2 article reviews and 1 final essay. The first and second assignments will be 750 words and the final 1000. These are worth 10%, 15%, and 20% of your grade, respectively. 

* The article reviews are a critical analysis of an article from a respectable newspaper or magazine or website about medicine (past or present). The choice of article is yours. *The goal is not simply to meet the word count, but to critically analyze the article you choose and relate it to the course.* You might explain how something billed as "new" has much earlier precedents. You might explain why a modern approach to a disease or medical issue differs from earlier medical responses. Even though you can choose your article to review, don't pick something that you can't relate to the course. Ask if you are unsure about whether an article is suitable or not. 

* Both reviews and the final essay can be submitted ahead of the due date via for preview, and I will provide brief comments as to whether you are on the right track or any major changes you should consider making.

* If you are displeased with your grade and think you can do better, you can visit with me about your paper, rework it, resubmit it, and I'll regrade it. You'll get the average of the two grades. There is no guarantee your grade will improve, but it always does.

* Your final will be to answer one of the questions listed below. I am open to alternative questions or creative projects, too, if you'd like to suggest one.


h3. Sample Questions/Topics

* To what extent is ancient and medieval medicine wrong (compared to modern views) because they had inferior medical technology?

* Compare and contrast ancient, medieval, and early modern medical frameworks.

* How has medical theory and practice been affected by social factors outside of "pure" medical knowledge?

* What, if anything, can modern medicine learn from pre-modern medicine?



h2. Other Advice to Help You Do Well

*   Do not suffer in silence. I try to situate discussions and assignments squarely within the objectives of the course, but I expect that you'll ask for clarification if such connections elude you.

*   If you have questions about your performance / grade during the semester, I will be very happy to meet with you to discuss how things are going. I understand that everyone comes into the course with different skills and backgrounds. **Serious effort goes a long way toward your grade!** 



h2. READINGS

*   Andrew Wear et al., _The Western Medical Tradition_ (Cambridge University Press, 1995) ISBN:978-0521475648 ["amazon":http://www.amazon.com/books/dp/0521475643)]

Most reading assignments are listed as pages from _WMT_, which will serve as our primary guide through the course. Reading assignments often include some short excerpts from historical sources themselves to give us a better feel for how people talked about medicine at a given time. These excerpts will be available at "UNM e-reserves":http://ereserves.unm.edu/eres/coursepage.aspx?cid=12559&page=docs.

---

h3(day). Week 1: Getting Started

<div class="dateicon"><p>19<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Course Overview 

*   course goals: history, medicine, and critical thinking
*   projects and presentations
*   survey of course topics
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>21<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Greek Medicine  

* _WMT_, 11-19.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>23<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Hippocrates

* _WMT_, 19-33.

</div>

---

h3(day). Week 2: Hippocrates and Greek Medicine

<div class="dateicon"><p>26<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Reading Classical Medicine

*  _Epidemics_ & _Aphorisms_ 
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>28<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Hellenistic Medicine

* _WMT_, 33-38.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>30<span>Aug</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Roman Medicine

* _WMT_, 39-58.
* Quiz

</div>
---

h3(day). Week 3: Late Roman Medicine and Galen

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>02<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Labor Day

</div>
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>04<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Galen

* _WMT_, 58-70.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>06<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Reading Galen

* _On the Usefulness of Parts_ & _On the Natural Faculties_
* Selections from Mark Grant (trans.), _Galen on Food and Diet_, 1-13; 14-18; 46-60; 68-83.
* Quiz

</div>

---

h3(day). Week 4: Late Antique and Early Medieval Medicine

<div class="dateicon"><p>09<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Christianity and Medicine

* _WMT_, 71-79.
* Common Medical Advice (49-54)
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>11<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Early Medieval Medicine

* _WMT_, 79-87.
* Plants and Pee (34-42)
* Look over the fabulously illustrated "surgical treatise":http://special.lib.gla.ac.uk/exhibns/month/may2006.html.
</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>13<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Break

</div>
</div>

---

h3(day). Week 5: Arabic Medicine

<div class="dateicon"><p>16<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Arabic-Islamic Medicine 

* _WMT_, 93-104.
* Avicenna's _Canon_.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>18<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Translation and Innovation 

* _WMT_, 104-122.
* Look over the beautiful "Arabic medical manuscript":http://special.lib.gla.ac.uk/exhibns/month/june2003.html.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>20<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Quiz

</div>

---

h3(day). Week 6: From East to West

<div class="dateicon"><p>23<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medicine in Islamic Society 

* _WMT_, 122-138.
* Medieval Descriptions of Hospitals, 471-477.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>25<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Salerno

* _WMT_, 139-146.
* "Regimen of Health from Salerno":http://books.google.com/books?id=FKs-AAAAYAAJ&dq=Sir+John+Harington,+The+School+of+Salernum:+Regimen+Sanitatis+Salerni&source=gbs_navlinks_s (composed 12th cen.; this English edition is from 1607), 75-156 (read a few pages carefully and skim the rest).

</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>27<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Break

</div>
</div>

---

h3(day). Week 7: Science, Medicine & Knowledge

<div class="dateicon"><p>30<span>Sep</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. The Development of Universities  

* _WMT_, 153-159.
* Selections from early medical school documents (191-204).

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>02<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medicine and Natural Philosophy  

* Selections discussing medicine and science (205-222).

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>04<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Quiz

*(due) Essay 1 Due

</div>


---

h3(day). Week 8: Images of the Profession

<div class="dateicon"><p>07<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. The Late Medieval Medical Profession

* _WMT_, 159-175.
The Faculty of Medicine of Paris vs. Jean Domrèmi (369-79).

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>09<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Picturing Medieval Medicine

* _WMT_, 175-183.

</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>11<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Fall Break

</div>
</div>

---

h3(day). Week 9: Medieval Disease

<div class="dateicon"><p>14<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medieval Disease

* _WMT_, 183-189.
* Selections Concerning Leprosy and Cancer (337-348).

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>16<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. The Black Death

* _WMT_, 189-198.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>18<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Reading the Black Death 

* Religious and Medical Responses (from Horrox)

</div>


---

h3(day). Week 10: Early Modern Disease and Exploration

<div class="dateicon"><p>21<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Early Modern Disease 

* _WMT_, 215-225.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>23<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Exploration and Medicine

* _WMT_, 225-244.

</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>25<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Break

</div>
</div>
---

h3(day). Week 11: The "Rediscovery" of Medicine

<div class="dateicon"><p>28<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Sick Poor 

* _WMT_, 224-250.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>30<span>Oct</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Renaissance Medicine & Humanism

* _WMT_, 250-264.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>01<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Quiz

</div>


---

h3(day). Week 12: Anatomy

<div class="dateicon"><p>04<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. The Anatomic Revolution 

* _WMT_, 268-280.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>06<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Anatomy after Vesalius

* _WMT_, 280-292.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>08<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Renaissance Surgery

* _WMT_, 292-298.
*   Ambroise Parey, "_The Works of that famous Chirurgion..._":http://books.google.com/books?id=TzVbqmHLfGMC&dq=Ambroise+Parey,+The+Works+of+that+famous+Chirurgion&source=gbs_navlinks_s, Trans. Thomas Johnson (London: Richard Cotes and W. Dugard, 1649)

</div>


---

h3(day). Week 13: Review and Rest

<div class="dateicon"><p>11<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Quiz

*(due) Essay 2 Due

</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>13<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Break

</div>
</div>

<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>15<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Break

</div>
</div>

---

h3(day). Week 14: New Worlds, New Remedies

<div class="dateicon"><p>18<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medical Botany 

* _WMT_, 298-310.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>20<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Paracelsus and Chemical Remedies

* _WMT_, 310-325.
* Skim the nice "Paracelsus exhibit from the NLM":http://www.nlm.nih.gov/exhibition/paracelsus/index.html.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>22<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medical Alchemy and Astrology

* Physicians arguments for the necessity of alchemy and astrology in medicine (317-333).
</div>

---

h3(day). Week 15: Shifting Paradigms

<div class="dateicon"><p>25<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Discovering Circulation

* _WMT_, 325-340.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>27<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Medicine in the Scientific Revolution

* _WMT_, 340-361.

</div>


<div class="day-off">
<div class="dateicon"><p>29<span>Nov</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Turkey Coma

</div>
</div>
---

h3(day). Week 16: Last Bits

<div class="dateicon"><p>02<span>Dec</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Final Quiz

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>04<span>Dec</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Conclusions

* _WMT_, 477-494.

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>06<span>Dec</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Final Wrap-up

</div>

---

h3(day). Week 17: Finals Week

<div class="dateicon"><p>11<span>Dec</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4. Final Essay due by 9:30am

</div>
