---
layout: cv
title: cv | fredgibbs
---

Frederick W Gibbs
Department of History
MSC06 3760
1 University of New Mexico
Albuquerque, NM 87131-1181
"fwgibbs@gmail.com":mailto:fwgibbs@gmail.com


h2. Academic Work

*Aug 2013 -*
Assistant Professor of History
University of New Mexico

*Aug 2009 - Jul 2013*
Assistant Professor of History
Director of Digital Scholarship
Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media
George Mason University

*PhD*, *MA*, History of Science, Medicine & Technology
_University of Wisconsin_ (2009, 2002)

*BA*, Physics 
_Carleton College_ (1998)


h2. Peer Reviewed Publications

* Manuscript under review: _Poison, Medicine, and Disease: Late Medieval and Early Modern Toxicology_.

* "Editorial Sustainability and Open Peer Review at Programming Historian," _DHCommons_ 1 (2015) %(pub-links)"DHCommons":http://dhcommons.org/journal/issue-1/editorial-sustainability-and-open-peer-review-programming-historian | "PDF":editorial-sustainability-pdf%

* "From Theory to Practice in the Digital Humanities," in _Bildungsgeschichte. International Journal for the historiography for education_ 1 (2015), 95-99. %(pub-links)"PDF":theory-to-practice-pdf%

* "Poisonous Properties, Bodies, and Forms in the Fifteenth Century," _Preternature_ 2.1 (2013): 19-46. %(pub-links)"project muse":preternature-muse% 

* "The Hermeneutics of Data and Historical Writing," in Jack Dougherty and Kristen Nawrotzki (eds.), _Writing History in the Digital Age._ (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2013) [with Trevor Owens] %(pub-links)"digitalculturebooks":hermeneutics-open%

* "Riding the Bicycle of Kuhn's _Structure_," _Historical Studies in the Natural Sciences_ 42.5 (2012): 510-513. %(pub-links)"JSTOR":kuhn-jstor | "PDF":kuhn-pdf%

* "The Historical Value of Ephemeral Discussion of Science on the Web" in _Science &#64; Risk: Toward a National Strategy for Preserving Online Science_, (Washington, DC: Library of Congress National Digital Information Infrastructure and Preservation Program, 2012). %(pub-links)"meeting site":hos-on-web-site | "PDF":hos-on-web-pdf%

* "Critical Discourse in the Digital Humanities," _Journal of the Digital Humanities_ 1.1 (2012). %(pub-links)"JDH":critical-discourse-jdh | "blog":critical-discourse-blog%

* "Building Better Digital Humanities Tools," _Digital Humanities Quarterly_ 6.2 (2012) [with Trevor Owens]. %(pub-links)"DHQ":tools-dhq%

* "New Textual Traditions From Community Transcription," _Digital Medievalist_ 7 (2011). %(pub-links)"DM":textual-traditions-dm%

* "A Conversation with Data: Prospecting Victorian Words and Ideas," _Victorian Studies_ 54.1 (2011) [with Dan Cohen]. %(pub-links)"project muse":victorian-muse | "blog":victorian-blog%

* “Natural History.” in _Oxford Dictionary of the Middle Ages_, ed. Robert E. Bjork. Oxford: Oxford University Press, February 2010.

* “Poison Libels,” in _Encyclopedia of Pestilence, Pandemics, and Plagues_, ed. Joseph P. Byrne. Greenwood Press, September 2008.

h2. Reviews

* Review of Luke Demaitre, _Medieval Medicine: The Art of Healing from Head to Toe_, in _Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences_, 69.1 (2014).
* Review of Nancy Siraisi, _Communities of Learned Experience. Epistolary Medicine in the Renaissance_, in _British Journal of the History of Science_, 47.1 (2014).
* Review of Ian Mortimer, _The Dying and the Doctors: the Medical Revolution in Seventeenth Century England_. _Journal of Social History_, Summer 2011.
* Review of _Chymists and Chymistry_, ed. Anthony Grafton. In _Pharmacy in History_, September 2009.


[siraisi-blog]/reviews/communities-of-learned-experience-review

[demaitre-blog]/reviews/medieval-medicine-the-art-of-healing-from-head-to-toe-review

[theory-to-practice-pdf]../publications/IJHE-Gibbs.pdf

[editorial-sustainability-pdf]../publications/Editorial_Sustainability.pdf

[preternature-muse]http://muse.jhu.edu/login?auth=0&type=summary&url=/journals/preternature/v002/2.1.gibbs.html
[preternature-blog]../poisonous-properties-bodies-forms

[kuhn-jstor]http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1525/hsns.2012.42.5.510
[kuhn-pdf]../publications/hsns.2012.42.5.510.pdf

[hos-on-web-site]http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/meetings/scienceonline_2012.html
[hos-on-web-pdf]http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/meetings/documents/othermeetings/science-at-risk-NDIIPP-report-nov-2012.pdf

[critical-discourse-jdh]http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/articles/critical-discourse-in-digital-humanities-by-fred-gibbs/
[critical-discourse-blog]/publications/critical-discourse-in-the-digital-humanities

[hermeneutics-open]http://quod.lib.umich.edu/d/dh/12230987.0001.001/1:7/--writing-history-in-the-digital-age?g=dculture;rgn=div1;view=fulltext;xc=1#7.3

[textual-traditions-dm]http://www.digitalmedievalist.org/journal/7/gibbs
[textual-traditions-blog]/publications/textual-traditions-from-community-transcription

[victorian-muse]http://muse.jhu.edu/login?auth=0&type=summary&url=/journals/victorian_studies/v054/54.1.gibbs.html
[victorian-blog]/publications/conversation-with-data

[tools-dhq]http://www.digitalhumanities.org/dhq/vol/6/2/000136/000136.html
[tools-blog]/publications/building-better-digital-humanities-tools

[mortimer-muse]http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/journal_of_social_history/summary/v044/44.4.gibbs.html
[mortimer-blog]/reviews/review-of-the-dying-and-the-doctors

[chymists-blog]/reviews/chymists-and-chymistry


h2. Presentations and Participations

* "The Universals and Particulars of Poison in the Sixteenth Century"
** History of Science Society (November 2015)

* "Aethetics of Digital Editions":http://fredgibbs.net/presentations/digital-latin-library/#/
** Digital Latin Library Workshop @ University of Oklahoma (June 2015)

* Panel Organizer: Medieval Data
** International Congress of the Medieval Academy of America (May 2015)

* The Poetics of Medieval Data
** International Congress of the Medieval Academy of America (May 2015)

* Re-viewing Data Scholarship
** History of Data/Data in History @ Columbia University (April 2015)

* Designing Scholarship
** Histories of the Future Workshop @ Princeton University (Feb 2015)

* Between Text, Argument, and Data: Interpreting New Visualizations in History 
** American Historical Association (Jan 2015)

* Poster Presenter for _The Programming Historian_ ("read more...":http://fredgibbs.net/posts/consider-the-poster)
** American Historical Association (Jan 2015)

* Workshop Instructor for Digital History Methods (Intermediate GIS)
** American Historical Association (Jan 2015)

* Workshop Organizer: Digital and Computational History of Science
** History of Science Society (November 2014)

* Digital Interfaces: Data, Design, Geography, and the Humanities 
** Southwest American Association of Geographers (October 2014)

* NEH Summer Institute Instructor on Text Mining
** NEH Summer Institute: Doing Digial History (August 2014)

* New Media and the Future of Scholarly Societies
** American Association for the History of Medicine (May 2014)

* Selected Presenter at Video Short Screening: "A Brief History of Toxicology":https://vimeo.com/94459223
** American Association for the History of Medicine (May 2014)

* Building a Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and Beyond
** Cyberinfrastructure Day at University of New Mexico (April 2014)

* Poison, Potatoes, and Post-Computational Humanities
** University of Houston (Feb 2014)

* Poison, Putrefaction, and Ontology of Disease in the Sixteenth Century
** Johns Hopkins University (Nov 2013)

* Speaking in Code Workshop Participant
** Scholars' Lab @ University of Virginia (November 2013)

* Document Similarity with R
** THATCamp @ RRCHNM (June 2013)

* Historical Mapping with QGIS
** THATCamp @ RRCHNM (June 2013)

* Pharmaceutical Traces: Exposing the Textual Traditions of Medieval Pharmacy
** International Congress of the Medieval Academy of America (May 2013)

* Commenter for Digital History Panel 
** Society for the History of the Federal Government (April 2013)

* Separating Poison and Medicine in the Sixteenth Century
** National Library of Medicine (September 2012)

* Archiving Online Science
** Library of Congress: Science at Risk Workshop (July 2012)

* Text mining in the Digital Humanities
** Hertog Global Strategy Initiative @ Columbia University (May 2012)

* Mapping Metadata
** American Society for Environmental History (Apr 2012)

* Organizing Early Modern Texts
** Renaissance Society of America (Mar 2012)

* Panel Chair: Visualizing the Archive
** Institute of Museum and Library Services WebWise Conference (Feb 2012)

* "Roundtable Participant: A conversation about text mining":http://aha.confex.com/aha/2012/webprogram/Session6143.html
** American Historical Association (Jan 2012)
* "Digital Poster: Lo-tech introduction to text mining":http://fredgibbs.net/extras/text-mining-digital-poster
** American Historical Association (Jan 2012)
* Session organizer: Report from Digging Into Data Participants
** American Historical Association (Jan 2012)
* "Criticism in the Digital Humanities":http://mith.umd.edu/podcast/?podcast=115
** Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities Digital Dialogs (Oct 2011)
* Moving Beyond Anecdotal History
** Digital Humanities Annual Conference (Jun 2011)
* "Implications of Data for the 21st Century Historian":http://www.nitle.org/live/events/123-digital-scholarship-seminar-implications-of-data
** NITLE Digital Scholarship Seminar (Apr 2011)
* "History as Data":http://www.tvworldwide.com/events/webwise/110309/default.cfm?tab=3
** Institute of Museum and Library Services WebWise Conference (Mar 2011)
* Towards Textual Editing Communities: Recreating the Middle Ages
** MARCO Manuscript Workshop (Feb 2011)
* Participant: API Workshop
** Maryland Institute for Technology in the Humanities (Feb 2011)
* "Putrefaction and Poison in the Sixteenth Century":http://prezi.com/xvcrjhs_3xw6/putrefaction/
** University of Minnesota History of Medicine Colloquium (Nov 2010)
* Generation from Putrefaction and Early Modern Causes of Disease
** History of Science Society (Nov 2010)
* New Textual Traditions for Discovering the Middle Ages
** Third International MARGOT Conference: Digital Middle Ages (June 2010)
* Medicine and Metaphor: Medical Discussions and Definitions of Poison
** International Congress of the Medieval Academy of America (May 2010)
* Poison in the World and the Body: Concepts of ‘Species' in Medical Theory
** Arizona Center For Medieval and Renaissance Studies(Feb 2010)
* The Science of Poison: New Analytical Approaches to Toxins in the Middle Ages
** International Congress of the Medieval Academy of America (May 2008)
* ‘The venomes doo preserve from diseases': Concepts and Categories of Poison
** UW History of Science Department Colloquium (Dec 2007)
* Medical Debates circa 1500: Approaches of Antonio Guaineri and Sante Arduino
** American Association for the History of Medicine (May 2007)
* Poison and Disease in the Renaissance
** New York Academy of Medicine Colloquium (Mar 2007)
* Food in the History of Science, Medicine, and Technology
** UW History of Science Department Brownbag (co-presenter, Dec 2006)
* Fourteenth-century Approaches to Toxicology
** History of Science Society (Nov 2006)
* The Natural Philosophy of Poison
** Midwest Junto for the History of Science (Apr 2006)
* Plague, Pestilence and Disease
** Society for the Social History of Medicine Post-graduate conference (Jan 2006)


h2. Recent Courses

* "History of Premodern Medicine":/courses/premodern-medicine/fall-2015
* "Advanced Historiography":/courses/historiography-grad/fall-2015
* "Intro to Historiography":../courses/historiography
* "Metaphor of Plague":../courses/metaphor-of-plague
* "Digital Mapping":/courses/digital-mapping
* "Digital Methods for the Humanities":../courses/digital-methods
* "Food, Diet, and Health":../courses/food-diet-health
* "Introduction to Digital History":../courses/archive/introduction-to-digital-history.html
* "Medieval Science and Medicine":../courses/archive/medieval-science-medicine.html
* "The Scientific Revolution":../courses/archive/scientific-revolution.html

h2. Ongoing Projects

* General Editor, "_Programming Historian_":http://programminghistorian.org


h2. Previous Digital Projects

Below I've described my role on some projects. For more general project descriptions, including descriptions of ongoing projects, please see "fredgibbs.net/projects":http://fredgibbs.net/projects.


h3. Metadata Improvement VIA Mapping (MIVIAM)

* Designed and coded highly functional Javascript interface to visualize thousands of data points on a Google map (botanical expedition data held at "JSTOR Plants":http://plants.jstor.org)
* Sorting, filtering, and editing functions allowed researchers to normalize and standardize metadata for easier research on botanical expeditions
* Architected database schema and interface to manage suggested changes to metadata


h3. Reframing the Victorians

* Created various visualizations of word frequency statistics in 19th century printed materials held at Google Books
* Ran large data mining operation using Amazon S3 and Elastic MapReduce
* Coordinated with Google to procure datasets for exploration
* Published methodology piece in _Victorian Studies_.

h3. Digging Into Data: Criminal Intent

* Researched cases on poison using Old Baily Online API and Voyant
* Developed Zotero translator to harvest data from the Old Bailey API
* Participated in routine conference calls with project team to review progress and meet deliverable deadlines


h2. Review Work

Austrian Science Fund, Digital Humanities Quarterly (DHQ), Digital Humanities Conference, Humanities in the European Research Area (HERA), MIT Press, Pearson, National Endowment for the Humanities (NEH), Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC)


h2. Fellowships and Awards

* Humanities Exposed (HEX) Scholar at the UW Center for the Humanities (2008)
* Dissertator Fellowship from UW Graduate School (2007)
* John Neu Distinguished Graduate Student Fellowship from UW HoS Dept. (2007)
* Research Award from the American Institute of the History of Pharmacy (2007)
* Paul Klemperer Fellowship from the New York Academy of Medicine (2006)
* National Science Foundation Dissertation Improvement Grant (2005-06)
* Heckman Research Grant from the Hill Monastic Manuscript Library (2005)
* Vilas Travel Grant from the UW Graduate School (2005)

h2. Technical Highlights

* 15+ years experience with small and large scale programming projects integrating various web technologies, including Javascript, HTML, PHP, Python, XML, XSLT, AJAX, CSS, MySQL, REST APIs.
* Broad knowledge and experience implementing web standards, accessibility guidelines, database design, and semantic mark-up. Adapted and customized open-source projects to client needs.
* 10+ years of web design experience creating harmony between user interfaces and information structures.
* Extensive experience providing technical advice and consultations for humanities scholars and projects, creating documentation, and formulating plans for long-term sustainability.

<div id="accordion">
h3. Previous Web Programming and Design Projects

<div>
<p>

h3. Nelson Institute for Environmental Studies (UW-Madison, Mar09  -  Oct09)

* Managed and executed complete website redesign centered around a custom developed tag-based resource management system (PHP, MySQL) to connect Nelson Institute faculty, students, and staff with each other through mutual research interests. 
* Integrated full news and event management system with custom tagging (and taxonomy manager) to unite all Institute resources.

h3. UW Center for the Humanities (Jan08  -  Jan10)

* Revitalized a static website to deliver rich and dynamic content through a standards compliant and typographically sound website.
* Designed and developed open-source web-based (PHP, MySQL) event calendar system to automate website maintenance and to feature audio and video resources.
* Helped shaped Center workflows for creating, publishing, and archiving all Center website content with multiple access points, including RSS/XML feeds.

h3. UW Biological Systems Engineering Department (Jan08  -  Jul09)

* Lead programmer for USDA funded project to build web tools for farmers to teach and promote energy conservation.
* Focus on readable display of complex data and intuitive user interfaces for data input, and extending analytical capabilities of tools.
* Assisted with project management by coordinating project timelines, milestones, and deliverables.

h3. Freelance web designer and developer (Jun05  -  Jan08)

* Coordinated with various academic departments, programs, and scholars to entirely redesign and develop customized web sites to effectively deliver content. 
* Clients have include the Medical History Department, Center for Culture, History, Environment, Journal of Undergraduate International Studies, and Holtz Center for Science and Technology Studies (all at UW-Madison).

h3. UW Student Academic Affairs (Jun03  -  Sep06)

* Architect, designer, developer for suite of 20+ websites; supervised undergraduate programmer. Juggled multiple projects with various timelines, deadlines; created full documentation for site code and best practices.
* Developed and implemented site-wide redesign built upon a custom CMS (PHP, MySQL) for all sites to manage a centralized event calendar, message board, and various student application forms.
* Created all layouts, design schemes, logos, and site graphics to preserve individual program personalities online; enforced University accessibility and style guidelines.
* Formulated and presented long-term web initiatives and project plans to UW Assistant Deans to create and increase web presence for specific undergraduate audiences.

h3. IBM and Target Corporations (Jul98  -  Feb00)

* Co-lead developer for first generation of target.com; responsible for back-end coding of e-commerce functionality with Java and Oracle, including product search engine to meet strict usability and performance requirements.
* Spearheaded standardization efforts and implementation of best practices among different programming, data modeling, and testing teams.
* Served as Information Technology Specialist in consulting role for Global Services Division; diagnosed and solved debugging and testing challenges quickly and efficiently, adjusted to varied work environments, and established productive personal relationships with clients.
</p>
</div>
</div> <!-- end accordion -->


