--- 
layout: post 
title: Archival Future of the History of Science
date: 2012-10-22 00:00:00
categories: [post, history of science, archives]
---

Historians of science need to take an active role in influencing the archival and curatorial practices toward science content&#8212;namely to encourage and argue for the preservation of content that might not seem &#8220;scientific&#8221; but that remains crucial for our future historical understandings of science.

> There remains a strong tendency to save only what is deemed as “good” science, which seriously reduces future historians’ ability to understand the character and boundaries of science.

A few months ago, a short workshop convened by the Library of Congress addressed the problem of preserving &#8220;science at risk.&#8221; It focused not on scientific data or official publications, but rather on what&#8217;s called gray literature&#8212;writing (in this case about science) that falls between the archival cracks&#8212;including sources like science blog aggregators, citizen science projects, open notebook scientists, reader comments on newspaper articles about science, and even individual blogs. Obviously, all of these will prove to be fundamental resources for future historians of science who will then have a much greater record of what people thought and wrote about science.

Or will they?

Only if we are casting as wide a collection net as possible. This is not a challenge related only to location (where to look), or of quantity (how much to save), although of course those are relevant concerns. One of the greatest challenges hinges on overcoming our traditional criteria employed when making difficult value judgments of quality. Needless to say, curators and archivists, are unable to save everything and must make difficult decisions. But, as the workshop clearly demonstrated, there remains a strong tendency to save only what is deemed as “good” science, which seriously reduces future historians’ ability to understand the character and boundaries of science.

## Selecting science

One of the supposed achievements of the so-called Scientific Revolution is the move toward openness and transparency. Experiments had to be demonstrable and repeatable; the cryptic esotericism of alchemical mysticism had been replaced with the matter-of-factness of the publications of scientific societies. The task of understanding nature had been wrestled from the stodgy and traditional university natural philosophers and put into the hands of the people. In reality, though, science was a gentlemanly sport, and without the proper social connections, your fabulous eyewitness observation was unlikely to find a sympathetic ear, and would certainly not find its way into the pages of the _Transactions_. Those at the highest ranks decided, through entirely understandable and defensible means, what was science and what wasn’t. This selection of good or bad science makes sense in this context, even if we might quibble with some of their criteria.

Needless to say, selection processes are still important. Even if one believes that storage space is cheap, and simple file formats are likely to be available many decades from now (as many already have been), such content needs to be not only collected and stored, but also made useful and visible, a process that takes substantial human work, even if the process can be heavily automated. Of course, the work of collecting, organizing, making visible, and making available is simply impossible given the magnitude of digital material and increasingly limited resources to conduct these complex processes. 

I argue here, from the point of view of a historian of science (and to some extent of a digital historian), that librarians, curators, and archivists must address the difficult question of what content to save with three important but often neglected considerations in mind: the varied audience for science content (e.g. scientists versus historians), the importance of collecting science content that departs form what might be considered good or mainstream science, and the changing nature of archival use. Throughout, I emphasize the role that historians of science have to play in making archivists aware of their questions and sources.

## Varied audiences

_Science at Risk_ workshop participants agreed that it is helpful to think of three stages of archival life: creation, near-term, and long-term. This tripartite scheme nicely encompasses the varied challenges of 1) collecting from diverse sources that employ diverse technologies; 2) making such content immediately available for immediate research needs, and 3) preserving it for posterity and future reference.

> In the long term, historians&#8212;especially historians of science&#8212;will benefit most if collection development is made with both scientists and historians in mind.

In addition to this scheme, we also must consider the different audiences that will benefit at those various stages. In the near term, other scientists and perhaps policy makers will likely be the primary audience&#8212;and thus dictate near-term strategies both in terms of what to collect and how it should be made visible and available. In the long term, however, historians&#8212;especially historians of science&#8212;will benefit most if collection development is made with both audiences in mind. While there is substantial overlap in the kinds of materials that each group will be interested in, there are significant differences that must factor into collection strategies.

The disciplinarily diverse audience and presenters at the _Science at Risk_ workshop showed they are actively creating and curating online science content according to their varied needs and interests. Workshop presenters associated with science blogging or citizen science projects, for example, demonstrated their distinct interest in preserving discussions about current science issues, whether from professional scientists or science enthusiasts; their content ranged widely across natural philosophical discussions, methodological questions, historical essays, or arguments about what species of bird appears in a particular photo. Open notebook enthusiasts demonstrated their interest in preserving a narrow but deep view of science in action. There is no doubt that all of these constitute sources worth saving. Such sources will be of use to scientists (or civic scientists) struggling with similar problems; parts will be useful for historians who want deeper insight into the messy processes of science that do not emerge from official and polished publications.

Yet for these generators of online science content&#8212;as seemed true for many participants at the workshop&#8212;the emphasis of what was at risk leaned heavily toward what the creators and managers of these resources, as well as those tasked with archiving such sources considered to be “good” science. There is no question that, when considering the near term use of scientists or future historical uses to learn about mainstream science, archives of content from publications like science blogs and open notebooks will prove to be fantastic and largely unprecedented resources.

> It would be deeply problematic for future history of science research if content selectors focused on preserving a narrow&#8212;and to some extent arbitrary&#8212;selection of content that a particular set of insiders thought was “good.”

Longer-term archival materials, however, are useful to a rather different audience that does not share the same agenda as many creators of online science content. From a historian’s perspective, it would be deeply problematic for future research if content selectors focused on preserving a narrow&#8212;and to some extent arbitrary&#8212;selection of content that a particular set of insiders thought was “good.” Of course it is true that historians&#8217; ability to understand and interpret the past will continue to be mediated by the stewards of our cultural artifacts: librarians, curators and archivists who, laboring under various practical constraints, must often save what is or will be of obvious value. This value is often determined by the context in which it is collected. Science content, then, is likely to be collected because it reflects upon the activities of a recognized scientific community and is said to constitute &#8220;good&#8221; science.

Yet some of the most fascinating work from historians, philosophers, and sociologists of science examines how societies (at various levels) demarcate science from non-science or how various communities embrace (or not) various explanations or theories. Such research often attempts to establish the ways in which historical actors determine the boundaries of science, or to examine how historians have chosen to portray them. Being able to determine the boundaries of science, regardless of their epistemological origin, are entirely crucial to the success of these historical efforts. As a result, thinking about such future historical use should encourage different kinds of selection processes from those that have been previously employed. Archivists and curators must select the broadest possible spectrum of science content that represents a wide range of attitudes and understandings about science, even when they contradict what would be generally considered good science. In other words, we must prioritize breadth over depth even when limitations on the content collection process do not allow a more cohesive or thorough cataloging effort. It will be helpful to broaden the filters, even if the catch from a wider net cannot be fully processed or cataloged per the usual rigor. Historians are gaining greater facility with processing such mountains of data and in fact need less parsing done for them.

> Archivists and curators must select the broadest possible spectrum of science content that represents a wide range of attitudes and understandings about science, even when they contradict what would be generally considered good science.

For example, we must actively preserve materials that can easily be labeled as pseudo-science, including creationist blogs, anti-climate change blogs, and generally science-skeptic blogs, regardless of their religious or political motivation. For the historian of science, the historical record that outlines ideas and attitudes about creationism, phrenology, and alchemy have been just as important as those that outline evolution, psychology, and chemistry. Similarly, science bloggers (and sites that aggregate such content) often publish invectives against what they consider pseudo-science or bad science. If collected together, they provide an unusually complete discourse around science in the popular realm. To attempt to separate “real” science and knowledge claims from the complex interactions of politics and science is to ignore or deny the vast historical analyses that reveal the social and cultural constructions of science and judgments about it.

One facet of the historical record that historians of science never seem get enough of is the &#8220;popular&#8221; attitudes, views, and understandings about science. In terms of targeting specific content, these might include blog posts and user comments about&#8212;and especially in response to&#8212;scientific or science policy articles that run in online newspapers, or other web periodicals with web forums of some sort. For example, the line of violent storms that swept through much of the eastern half of the country in the summer of 2012 were the subject of numerous newspaper articles that prompted user comments that mentioned climate change as a possible explanation for the rare storm system. Many comments (perhaps in a coordinated effort) explicitly challenged any connection between global warming and severe weather or the scientific status of man-made climate change. This is a wonderful and new (historically speaking) venue for getting at a variety of attitudes about science, including the kinds of arguments people do or do not not make in the course of such debates about the viability or applicability of certain scientific theories. And it perfectly exemplifies the so-called gray literature&#8212;writing that does not fall into traditional archival categories&#8212;than can be easily neglected, especially by scientists and others interested in promoting “real” science, which can unfairly minimize the voices of those who do not agree with it.

> Especially if the mainstream science blogging sites or other official publications turn their back on what they deem as “bad” science, both historians of science and the cultural heritage community must redouble their efforts to capture this rhetoric.

 Especially if the mainstream science blogging sites or other official publications turn their back on what they deem as “bad” science, both historians of science and the cultural heritage community must redouble their efforts to capture this rhetoric. This would, for example, allow future historians to see how effective such rhetoric was at important political moments, how it has changed, or how it correlates with other data, like demographic or election data. It can provide a fascinating window onto a much broader scientific discourse that lies outside the typical venues of official science publications. But of course the broadens the collection net even further, which is where historians of science must be more vocal about not only what kinds of sources they _use_, but also what kinds they </i>want</i>.

Apart from the discourse itself, one of the potential values of science content captured from online sources is to help historians to understand the wide diffusion, perhaps even the popularization, of scientific knowledge. To study (at least effectively) larger social phenomena such as diffusion, though, requires careful and relatively precise metadata about the content, such as when and where a particular post or comment came from&#8212;information that is sometimes not visible on the webpage where the content resides. Historians will hope for as much metadata as possible, and their analysis will be as rich as the metadata is complete. As websites may balk at collecting and/or sharing data about posts, archivists are seriously limited when working only in content-ingestion mode. Rather, librarians, archivists, and curators must work with content providers to capture as much metadata about the posts as possible (even if not publicly visible, such as IP addresses that reveal geographic data) in a way that is sympathetic to privacy concerns without being a slave to them.

When trying to understand the diffusion of scientific knowledge, not only is content essential, but also important is some sense of its influence. One obvious example would be to capture the viewing or download statistics for various publications, or perhaps how often (and when) it was posted to Facebook or retweeted. But the many kinds of statistics that one might find associated with a particular online publication (and thus might want to preserve) do not necessarily overly complicate the archival process. It is important to remember collecting can be done in ways that preserve metrics without thinking too much about exactly what needs to be preserved. Websites, services, and publishers often display this kind of information on webpages that contain the original content.

> Future researchers might use various text mining methods to understand influence of a particular blog or article and correlate it to other historical events&#8212;but this depends on having as much data and metadata as possible, not only what is prejudged to be of sufficient scientific quality

 At the same time, it is also important to think about the ways in which diffusion might be measured in ways that are not already explicitly quantified and displayed on pages. Participants at the workshop repeatedly lauded the value of &#8220;alt-metrics&#8221; in measuring the value of scientific work or its uptake in the community. But once publishers start to foreground alt-metrics for whatever purpose&#8212;as they already have begun to do&#8212;then they are not really “alt” anymore, and thus they lose some of their value that they had when they were truly outside mainstream measures. Truly &#8220;alt&#8221; metrics are not, by definition, clearly visible. The implications for archiving&#8211;as with content&#8211;is to save as much metadata as possible, not just what is obvious value now. Of course it is difficult if not impossible to anticipate what future alt-metrics might be, and truly alt-metrics will comes from discovering new relationships between whatever combinations of data are available. And this is yet another argument for casting as wide an archival net as possible for not only content but metadata as well. Future researchers might, for example, use various text mining methods to understand influence of a particular blog or article and correlate it to other historical events&#8212;but this depends on having as much data and metadata as possible, not only what is prejudged to be of sufficient scientific quality or to have an established value for measuring diffusion. Certainly, such determinations will yield different kinds of historical analyses in the future.

## Relationships between historians and cultural stewards

Lastly, I want to emphasize how we must facilitate new kinds of relationships that can help make preserving web science content a manageable enterprise. These grow out of the workshop conversations, but they maintain my bias as a historian of science.

The scholarly community must transcend the typical disciplinary divides between historians and archivists. In particular, historians of science are well positioned to make insightful recommendations about the kinds of science content that will be useful for future historical research. We can hardly rely on a few Subject Matters Experts (officially known as SMEs) to know of all possibilities across such a broad range of science disciplines and sub fields. There is simply too much to know. Even with the most vigilant efforts toward objectivity, the gravitational pull of mainstream science and higher-profile spaces of discussion remains strong.

Historians of science are uniquely positioned to know about useful alternative venues for science content that will be useful for historical purposes. Those engaged in science content preservation might reach out to a wide audience of historians and sociologists of science and technology to discover what kinds of sources they now use and what they hope their students will use in the future. They will be especially helpful for understanding how current historical research questions and answers would be different if certain kinds of materials would have been saved. Those who consider themselves digital historians are worth consulting as well, to understand growing importance of data, new techniques for exploring it, and future expectations of access.

Diligent archivists are now creating a historical record that has never been so rich. But there is no inevitability to its utility. Historians of science, especially those who are as much interested in the fringe materials around the mainstream notions of &#8220;scientific&#8221; literature, must take an active role in foregrounding the importance of the kinds of materials that they have almost always wanted, but almost never had.