---
layout: syllabus
course-title: Diet, Health, Expertise
course-slug: diet-health-expertise
number: HIST 410
term: Fall 2020
section: schedule
---

# HIST 410: Week 14

## Review and Reflection 1
This week we're really starting to ramp down for the course. As a warm up for the course final (due the last Friday of Finals Week), your weekly reflection this week will be to analyze Wednesday's reading (for which there is no assignment) in terms of the whole course. As soon as you can, check out the [BIG POINTS critique](https://youtu.be/Ewn7u87K9ts) for last week. It's accidentally a little longer than normal (~30 min), but I hope you'll agree that on the whole we've had a relatively low lecture requirement for this course!

{% include alert.html class='warning' title='Due this week' text="
- M: Reading quiz
- F: Weekly reflection
"%}


### Mon 11/16
- Christie Aschwanden, [You Can’t Trust What You Read About Nutrition](http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/you-cant-trust-what-you-read-about-nutrition/), (_FiveThirtyEight_, Jan 6, 2016).
- Julia Belluz, [I asked 8 researchers why the science of nutrition is so messy. Here’s what they said](https://www.vox.com/2016/1/14/10760622/nutrition-science-complicated), _Vox_, Aug 16, 2016.  

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Reading Quiz' text="
Just a basic reading quiz for today that MUST BE DONE BEFORE MIDNIGHT on TUESDAY; afterwards, check out the [quiz explanation / BIG POINTS video](https://youtu.be/NGBVwpTmAC0).
"%}

### Wed 11/18
- Dariush Mozaffarian, Irwin Rosenberg, Ricardo Uauy, "History of modern nutrition science—implications for current research, dietary guidelines, and food policy", (_BMJ_ 2018; 361:k2392).

{% include alert.html class='warning' title='NO READING REFLECTIONS' text="
No reading responses due today, but look ahead to Friday.
"%}


### Fri 11/20
- NO NEW READING, just your weekly reflection as explained below.
- If you haven't seen it yet, the [quiz explanation / BIG POINTS video](https://youtu.be/NGBVwpTmAC0) may be useful.
- [My critique of this article](https://youtu.be/xfKv2uNLbp8) is essential viewing for a successful final.


{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Weekly Reflection' text="
For your weekly reflection this week, we're going to do a kind of a Final Course Reflection Warm-up. Reflecting on what we've done in the course so far, how well does Wednesday's reading establish/outline a productive future for understanding the relationship between nutrition, diet, and health? What is the (implied) role of science? We've obviously covered a lot more history than is in (or would be appropriate for) for an article like this. Are there ISSUES (not necessarily specific historic \"facts\") that the article should have engaged with? The more readings you can review and try to tie in from the entire course (ESPECIALLY MONDAY'S READINGS), the easier and better your final will be.
"%}
