---
layout: syllabus
course-title: Diet, Health, Expertise
course-slug: diet-health-expertise
number: HIST 410
term: Fall 2020
section: schedule
---

# HIST 410: Week 15

## Food Traditions and Societal Health
{% include alert.html class='warning' title='Nothing Due This Week' text="
As you can see from the box below, originally there were going to be a few readings about Thanksgiving (seems appropriate for a food/diet course), but I'm getting the sense this semester is feeling longer than usual (and they are too long anyway). Fewer assignments done better is in everyone's best interests. So let's make cancel culture work in our favor and cancel this week.

Sooner than later, you'll need to watch the [future of nutrition article critique](https://youtu.be/xfKv2uNLbp8)--the way I see the article you critiqued last week (Mozaffarian, et al.) and how it fits into the course. Essential viewing for a successful final.
"%}


{% include alert.html class='info' title='Originally' text="
We can't NOT read about Thanksgiving this week! These readings have nothing to do with diet/health, but we might also think about how food relates to civic health in addition to bodily health. It's common to think about food as bringing people together, but it's also a way of exerting control.

You have one post due this week, which I highly recommend you complete BY WEDNESDAY NIGHT. But if you're swamped with other essays, exams, etc, just make sure to post it before the end of the weekend.

- Andrew F. Smith, \“The First Thanksgiving\”, _Gastronomica_ 3.4 (2003): 79–85.
- Philip Deloria, \“The Invention of Thanksgiving\”, _New Yorker_, 95.37 (November 25, 2019): 70–74.


This is a more reflective/opinion post than normal, but they should still show me you're familiar with ALL the readings for this week.
- How do the Thanksgiving articles complicate the traditional Thanksgiving narrative?
- How do the articles suggest that food traditions play a role in societal health?
- Does holiday food itself really matter (like turkey, or ham), or is it just a vehicle for other social functions?
"%}



### Thurs 11/26: Thanksgiving!
Bon Appétit!
