--- 
layout: post 
title: Fictional Landscapes and Fuzzy Maps
date: 2015-05-13 10:00:00
---

**Amanda Morton**

<span id="docs-internal-guid-23189739-1a86-a7a8-fc"
class="anchor"></span>When looking at the digital modeling and analysis
techniques available to today's historians, there seems to be disconnect
between the realities of medieval data and the expressive capabilities
of those tools. Today, I am not going to talk about ways to clean up
this data, or about the occasionally problematic ways we handle and map
archaeological evidence. I am going to discuss methods through which we
can work with uncertain or contradictory evidence found in specifically
written sources. How should we visualize the data we pull from these
sources? What concerns should we have about pulling data from sources we
are trained to heavily criticize and distrust? How do we demonstrate our
own uncertainty about this source data in the resulting visual argument
or augmentation of our argument?

By examining techniques from outside our field and adapting these
methods to our sources and our methods of historical analysis, we can
find ways to create visualizations of medieval sources that demonstrate
our understanding of the problematic and incomplete nature of these
texts, while making a case for the validity of these visual arguments as
forms of historical analysis. In the following sections, I will discuss
how utilizing methodologies currently being explored by literary
scholars and geographers can change the way historians look at maps. In
particular, these sections will look at how understanding fictional
landscapes and using fuzzy cognitive mapping theories can help
historians account for the authorial bias and inherent uncertainty found
in our sources. These are not concrete solutions to every problem, but
are intended to provide historians with ideas about how to reconsider
mapping complex data.

--------

<span id="docs-internal-guid-dc0fc8fb-79ec-63fd-d1"
class="anchor"></span>Medieval place data is inherently ambiguous and
therefore difficult to enter into GIS software or tools like Google
Maps, leaving those of us who wish to analyze space and place with
little recourse but to force this information to fit into modern
conceptions of spatial representation. This is especially true when
working with textual sources; while archaeological evidence and extant
structures can provide the necessary datum points to create point-based
maps, written sources are less clear about specific locations. My own
project involves working with sources for the Justinianic plague that
vary in language, method, and motivation, making it difficult to manage
any geographic information I can gather. In a field where clean census
or satellite data is not guaranteed, how can medieval historians deal
with problematic location information, coming from problematic source
material, in ways that embrace the ambiguity of the data?

While it is possible to make an easy representative map by targeting
specific (modern) geographic points, we know that maps produced using
this methodology may result in misleading depictions of ancient and
medieval areas of influence, movement, or settlement. Conflicting
sources and ever-changing notions of borders and areas of influence make
life difficult for pre-modern historians interested in mapping. There
are other options; recent advances in GIS technology and the adaptation
of the methods of cognitive science for dealing with the vagueness of
human-produced data have led to the development of geographic fuzzy set
data and algorithms that make it possible to move beyond precise data
points, and include regions defined by a number of different layers of
data points, lines, or polygons. These analytical methods allow for the
visual representation and layered construction of vague location data.
Spatial analysis designed to represent ambiguity provides medieval
historians with a way to model and analyze the complex relationships
between space and place, humans and their environment, and textual and
material evidence.

Literary scholars have embraced a kind of comparative perspective-based
mapping technique to deal with authorial voice and the intentional
manipulation of literary geographies. In publications related to the
*Literary Atlas of Europe*, Anne-Kathrin Reuschel, Barbara Piatti, and
Lorenz Hurni discuss methods that might be used to map literary data
that is vague or even imaginary, using GIS and other digital mapping
tools. More importantly for this project, they argue that:

> A certain geospace, used as textual space within different fictions,
> is never the same: Prague through the eyes of Paul Leppin (German
> Prague writer) is another Prague than through the eyes of Alois
> Jirásek (Czech Prague writer), even though both were living at the
> same time and using imported places by the majority. Their
> descriptions of Prague differ to such an extent that one might think
> they were writing about different towns.[1]

In literary geographies, mapping cannot be limited to finding and
matching place to real world location; authorial perspective must be a
necessary element in creating maps from literature. For the authors
considered in my project it is imperative that we understand how they
wanted to present the world of the Justinianic plague to their readers.
For Procopius, centered in Constantinople, the plague's influence on the
Byzantine empire formed the core of his description. Just as the Pragues
of Leppin and Jirásek differed, so too did the landscape of a
plague-ridden Mediterranean to Evagrius and Procopius. In essence, the
locations described in Justinianic plague texts have been fictionalized
to fit the purposes of their descriptors. In dealing with fictionalized
locations, we must deal with the personalities of their creators and map
not the *real* geography of the plague, but the fictionalized reality of
its authors.

Additionally, the version of the world that appears in travel narratives
presents an interesting challenge. John of Ephesus's travel narrative
documenting evidence of the plague between Alexandria and Constantinople
is replete with anecdotal evidence, relative location evidence, and
interactions between the author and those affected by the plague. In
their *Deep Mapping of Brazil* project report, Sandes and Owens analyze
travel narratives and argue for the creation of maps based on authorial
perspective and connections between the author and the people, events,
and environs the author encounters.[2] Using known geographic waypoints,
and connecting them with the events and stories related in the
narrative, this kind of deep mapping technique does not depend on strict
geographical data or statistics, but on a kind of created relational
database of the author's environment.

As medievalists, we can analyze the authors of our sources similarly.
While we cannot necessarily put together a side-by-side comparison of
Procopius's Constantinople and the “real” geographic world of the
Byzantine empire in the sixth century, we can use the geographic
name-dropping and descriptive evidence in saints' lives, travelogues,
church histories, missionary reports, and political histories to
understand and visualize the way that our authors understood their
environment, or how they wanted their readers to see the world. Layering
literary perspective maps for these authors gives us a visual
representation of how these authors created their own plague
geographies. Moreover, modern epidemiologists are incredibly dependent
on witness testimony and even anecdotal evidence to track the movement
of a disease. In a sense, these sources serve the same purpose as oral
histories of earlier plagues do for modern disease investigators.
Putting these stories together visually can, perhaps, give some sense of
the scale of the disease in popular memory, and serve as a barometer for
the global impact of a plague pandemic. This rationale for mapping
historical epidemics is not new, but I would argue that the important
thing to remember is that the visualizations created from these sources,
however centered in theory or developed using the most advanced mapping
software, should still be approached as critically as we have been
taught to approach the sources on which they are based.

These literary mapping techniques reflect a movement within the field of
geography toward integrating vagueness in geographic data, and the
development of methods for dealing with fuzzy statistics and messy
ontologies. For those of us interested in creating historical maps that
can serve as visual arguments or analytical tools, an understanding of
how geographic scientists have been using visualization tools to develop
geographic arguments seems essential. So as we attempt to wrangle
problematic source information into useful and useable maps, it is only
logical to see how geographers handle human source data and issues of
vagueness or uncertainty in their own data collection process. In this
section, I will briefly trace the development of fuzzy cognitive mapping
from an initial philosophical paradox, to the implementation of fuzzy
set theory, and finally to the development of an algorithm that can be
used to visualize uncertainty.

Geographers dealing with human data have turned to philosophy and to the
cognitive sciences to address uncertainty and the ontological roadblocks
thrown by the development of a global geographic community; terms used
in one location to describe hills, mountains, swamps, and forests, posed
problems when combined with local definitions of the same. Geographical
concepts like ‘mountain,' ‘hill,' and ‘village’ provide a challenge to
geographers who need to define borders between terms — and between
regions.[3]

In an effort to determine a terminological system for these boundary
spaces, Peter Fisher turned to both philosophy and mathematics. Boolean
models cannot describe most geographic concepts — features and
delineations are rarely defined as either one thing or another, and
definitions change according to the region of origin and experiences of
the geographers involved in describing these concepts. Fisher,
therefore, seeks a “formal recognition of vagueness in geographical
phenomena.”[4] In doing so, he suggests the use of the Sorities Paradox,
multi-valent logic, and fuzzy sets. The Sorities Paradox dates back to
the ancient Greeks, and should be familiar to most historians, if not in
name, then in concept. The paradox asks the question ‘what is a heap?’:

Is one grain of sand a heap of sand? The answer to this simple question
is clearly NO.

If a second grain is added to the first, is there a heap? Again the
answer is NO.

If a third grain is added, is there a heap? For a third time the answer
is NO.

Therefore, if there are n grains, but no heap, then adding one grain to
make n + 1 grains will not make a heap. The paradox, of course, is that
at some point there will be a heap, and that at some point past that,
there will be more than a heap and the argument can reverse.[5] The
fuzzy area is the space between grain and heap. Fisher argues that,
because the Sorities Paradox can be used to test for vagueness,
geographers should apply it to geographic concepts to determine whether
or not they fall into this category.

What fuzzy set theory, when combined with cognitive analysis, can do is
model vagueness, or potentialities in complex systems.[6] To some extent
historians use fuzzy set theory in determining eras or periods of time.
We assign some seemingly random set of years the term ‘early modern’ or
‘late medieval’ in terms of where they exist on a spectrum of modern vs.
not modern or medieval vs. not medieval. For geographers, and for
historians interested in the application of GIS and geographic concepts
to historical analysis, the boundaries between geographic concepts and
the efforts to solve ontological disagreements[7] are an important part
of dealing with the fuzziness of human interpretation of geographic
features.

Fuzzy datasets involve evaluating the 'membership' of something between
one category and another, and then mapping the level of membership.[8]
These mathematical or conceptual sets can be used to talk about
uncertain human data; borders of cities can be determined by what
locations are clearly “IN” or “OUT”, and by understanding the levels of
“in-ness” or “outness” applied to a specific area.[9] In discussing
Procopius or Evagrius' notion of the borders of empire, for instance,
levels of membership in the influence-area of the empire can be assigned
and presented based on our reading of how locations are depicted in the
source, and on what we know about these locations from other sources.
Assigning membership grades to data allows GIS to be used to examine
vague or uncertain information, or add levels of influence to different
sources. While we may not be interested in the details of the algorithms
generated by this research to create these fuzzy sets and
relationship/membership ratings in creating historical maps, we should
recognize the value of this theoretical approach in addressing
complexity and uncertainty in our historical analyses. The visualization
of a membership set allows us to show these gray areas in our data. For
historians augmenting or constructing an argument using geographic
analysis, the revelation of this fuzziness and uncertainty is essential.

In order to put lines on our maps, in order to construct deep (context)
maps of historic events like the Justinianic plague, historians need to
be familiar with and involved in the current debates in geography. The
math involved is less important than the theory, but the math helps
generate the models we need to use to convey uncertainty in historical
analysis. Just like modern geographers cannot remove maps and the
varying geographic ontologies from their context, historians interested
in utilizing tools like GIS or other spatial technologies should
understand how boundaries are determined, how tags and other forms of
metadata are created, and perhaps offer our own methodologies to a field
that is moving beyond binary logic and into the fuzzy space where we do
our work.

So how should historians handle vague map data? How might medieval
historians, in particular, use maps to better understand our limited
textual sources? In his discussion of medieval plague maps, David Mengel
argues that maps, unlike scholarly texts, “struggle to represent
ambiguity, uncertainty, and provisional conclusions.”[10] He goes on to
suggest that while the medium of maps is problematic, the nature of the
audience is equally responsible for the misuse of historical maps; he
claims, perhaps rightly, that readers often tend to treat maps like
accurate depictions of reality. Mengel's solution to both of these
problems, that “not everything should be mapped” strikes me as a poor
substitute for a more considered analysis of maps and their uses as both
primary sources and as analytical tools.[11]

By incorporating the work of literary scholars and geographers, however,
we can create maps that *can* show ambiguity, and are able to handle the
uncertainty inherent in any kind of historical study. Points on maps
created with GIS and JavaScript libraries can contain their own
descriptions, source information, and cautionary information.
Additionally, by borrowing and adapting the tools of philosophers,
geographers, and cognitive scientists, historians mapping even vague
relational or locational data can represent fuzziness and conflicting
information using layers, variations on heat maps, and membership
analysis using fuzzy sets. These maps will not be perfect
representations of reality, but then, neither are our textual sources.
Expecting maps created from flawed data to somehow solve the associated
vagueness or problematic nature of the information goes against
everything we are taught as young historians about using primary source
data. We can use mapping, however, to combine data from different
sources and to integrate archaeological and environmental data,
resulting in a visualization that is as representative as possible of
what we think we know about a particular series of events at that moment
in time.

As historians of Late Antiquity and the Medieval period, we are trained
to read our sources like eye-witness statements in a trial. Wrapped in
opinion and hearsay, and often motivated by moral or storytelling
concerns, our written and visual sources are particularly difficult to
turn into functional or useful data. Numbers are often assumed to be
exaggerated or poorly translated, so how can we truly know the casualty
rate of the Justinianic plague, or the true number of troops sent to
North Africa? How do we read Procopius as a source in both the *Wars*
and the *Secret History*? Searching for objective “truth” in historical
sources is not something we are trained to do, nor should it be. A fuzzy
cognitive map, or an accompanying visualization, can show how this data
fits into a fuzzy set of possible solutions to a complex historical
problem. When I look at the use of plague around the Mediterranean after
the Justinianic plague, I can show how different uses of plague words
relate to concrete instances of a plague outbreak.

Just as geographers must account for ontological and cultural
differences in the creation of modern maps, and epidemiologists readily
integrate anecdotal evidence and oral histories into complex maps of
environmental systems and routes of movement to visualize epidemics,
historians should account for changing technologies and theories when we
seek to create our own maps.The authors we analyze certainly considered
the landscapes they wrote about as malleable as the stories they told,
so our visualizations of their data must account for this fictionalizing
of space and place. Using and adapting tools and methods developed in
other fields, we can create maps that are arguments for one version of
an event, presented in a visual language that uses a common geographical
frame of reference to help the reader place that argument in context.

[1] Anne-Kathrin Reuschel, Barbara Piatti, and Lorenz Hurni, “Modelling
Uncertain Geodata for the Literary Atlas of Europe,” in Understanding
Different Geographies, ed. Karel Kriz, William Cartwright, and Michaela
Kinberger, Lecture Notes in Geoinformation and Cartography (Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013), 140,
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-642-29770-0\_11.

[2] Sandes, Anderson C. and J.B. Owens. “A Globally Oriented Deep
Mapping of Brazil,”
http://www.academia.edu/205957/A\_Globally\_Oriented\_Deep\_Mapping\_of\_Brazil.

[3] Peter Fisher and Jo Wood, “What Is a Mountain? Or The Englishman Who
Went up a Boolean Geographical Concept but Realised It Was Fuzzy,”
*Geography* 83, no. 3 (July 1, 1998): 247–256.

[4] Peter Fisher, “Sorites Paradox and Vague Geographies,” *Fuzzy Sets
and Systems* 113, no. 1 (July 1, 2000): 7.

[5] Ibid., 8.

[6] João Paulo Carvalho, “Rule Based Fuzzy Cognitive Maps in Humanities,
Social Sciences and Economics,” in Rudolf Seising and Veronica Sanz
González, Soft Computing in Humanities and Social Sciences (Springer
Science & Business Media, 2011), 287. Carvalho gives a brief but good
description of how fuzzy cognitive mapping allows for the representation
of complex systems and the modeling of events and their influence on the
complex system. These graphs are not maps, but illustrate the capability
of fuzzy visualizations to handle non-linear dynamic systems.

[7] For a discussion of how tagging and ontologies develop organically
and should be incorporated into classification systems, see: Marieke Guy
and Emma Tonkin, “Folksonomies,” *D-Lib Magazine* 12, no. 1 (January
2006), http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january06/guy/01guy.html; N. Guarino,
“Formal Ontology, Conceptual Analysis and Knowledge Representation,”
*International Journal of Human Computer Studies* 43, no. 5 (1995):
625–640; T. R. Gruber and Stanford University Knowledge Systems
Laboratory, *Ontolingua: A Mechanism to Support Portable Ontologies*
(Stanford University, Knowledge Systems Laboratory, 1992). Guarino ad
Gruber both support enforcing ontological systems of classification in
order to support interoperability and portability between GIS systems.

[8] Guesgen, Hans Warner. “Fuzzy Reasoning about Geographic Regions.” in
Frederick E. Petry, Vincent B. Robinson, and Maria A. Cobb, Fuzzy
Modeling with Spatial Information for Geographic Problems (Springer
Science & Business Media, 2006), 6.

[9] Z.-Q. Liu, “Fuzzy Cognitive Maps in GIS Data Analysis,” Soft
Computing 7, no. 6 (May 1, 2003): 394–401,
doi:10.1007/s00500-002-0228-0.

[10] D.C. Mengel, “A Plague on Bohemia? Mapping the Black Death,” *Past
& Present* 211, no. 1 (2011): 8.

[11] Ibid., 33–34.
