--- 
layout: post 
title: "Documenting early medieval *medici* in Italian charters, AD 800-1100"
date: 2015-05-13 12:00:00
---

**Luca Larpi**

This paper (of which this is a long abstract) discusses some issues raised by my survey of *ca.* 17,000
charters, aimed at identifying individual doctors active in early
medieval Italy, and the subsequent undertakings to create an online
database to make the gathered material available worldwide.

The medici database was one of the main outcomes of “I sign therefore I
am. The occupational identity of doctors in Italy, ss. IX-XI”, a
Wellcome-funded project designed by Clare Pilsworth (University of
Manchester), whose goal was documenting medical practitioners in the
early Middle Ages using records of legal transactions from several
kingdoms across the Italian peninsula. In 2012 I joined in as Research
Associate with the job of making a systematic survey of charters held in
the archives of twelve Italian cities.

The surveyed collections were chosen on the basis of their geographical
distribution and the number of available documents, in order to provide
a set of data reflecting as much as possible the varying realities of
early medieval Italy. They are the following:

-   Piedmont: Asti and Novara; 

-   Lombardy: Milan and Bergamo; 

-   Veneto: Vicenza; 

-   Emilia-Romagna: Piacenza, Reggio-Emilia and Ravenna; 

-   Tuscany: Lucca and Pistoia; 

-   Lazio: Rome; 

-   Campania: Naples and Salerno.

178 documents mentioning 109 individual *medici* were identified across
the peninsula.

**The database**

One of the main outcomes of the project was the compilation of a
[database](http://www.alc.manchester.ac.uk/subjects/history/research/projects/italian-doctors/),
accessible and searchable online via the University of Manchester
website.

The *medici* database is typological in nature, as it lists almost
exclusively medical practitioners attested in early medieval Italy, and
small in dimensions: 178 attestations are not exactly what one might
call “big data”. The database, however, is proving useful for a number
of reasons. First of all, it provides useful guidance for any scholar
trying to find his or her own way in the labyrinth of multiple editions
of medieval Italian charters. Secondly, the search page allows a
user-friendly way to have a quick access to specific documents. But it
is perhaps when it is used in connection with other, wider data
collections that the database shows its full potential.

An example could help to clarify this point. I spent last year working
on the material I gathered for early medieval Salerno. I was interested
in analyzing in detail the references to medical practitioners in this
area, before the emergence of the so-called Medical School around the
end of the eleventh century. Before starting this work, all I had was a
list of charters attesting medici active in Salerno between the ninth
and the eleventh century. Sometimes all the database recorded was the
name of the practitioner and his role in the transaction, but in some
cases it also gave the names of the father and other relatives. This
would bring me only so far, and it was evident that if I wanted to learn
more about these people, I had to look somewhere else. A solution could
have been going through the ten volumes of the Codex Diplomaticus
Cavensis, which published most of the available charters relative to
Salerno, currently held in the archive of the Abbazia della Santissima
Trinita’ in Cava dei Tirreni. I had to face two problems, however. The
first was practical: working in Manchester, I could not have an easy
access to the series. The second was the nature of CDC – as eight of the
current ten volumes were published in the second half of the nineteenth
century, I could not count on very reliable indexes.

Luckily for me, the whole Codex is now available online via ALIM
(Archivio della Latinità Italiana del Medioevo), an ambitious project
sponsored by the Unione Accademica Nazionale (U.A.N.) aiming at making
available the whole corpus of writings produced in Italy during the
Middle Ages. Charters obviously form an important part of this database,
and they can be searched by edition, place and type. ALIM is the exact
opposite of my medici database. By its very nature, it is very generic
and “shapeless”, containing thousands of data about all sort “medieval
writings”. The richness of information it can provide is almost
overwhelming, unless one knows exactly what he/she is looking for.

And this is where the medici database is useful. When I tried to search
the specific data gathered there in ALIM, looking for not just for
people labeled as medici but also people with the same name, same family
connections and affiliations, I came across a great deal of unexpected
findings.

For example, I was able to reconstruct the family tree of a Petrus
clericus et medicus, attested in Salerno only once in 1054.

This Petrus is an interesting figure: a prominent physician at the court
of the last Lombard prince of Salerno, Gisulf II, he had two brothers,
Adelarius and Mascinus, important landowners in the north-west area of
the principate. His family and social networks, plus the fact that he
disappears from our documentation after 1050s might suggest a possible
identification with Petrus Germanus, the first magister of medicine ever
attested in Salerno, killed by prince Gisulf ‘in order to steal his
property’, as Amatus of Montecassino puts it in his Historia Normannorum
IV.41.

Neither Petrus’ hypothetical family tree, not his possible
identification with Petrus Germanus however appear in the medici
database. Since this records only charters directly attesting a medicus,
all you will find here is a reference to Petrus son of Romualdus. Simply
put, there is no space for any hypothesis around this individual.

The question I am asking myself – and I am asking you today – is how
this kind of information can be shown in the rigid framework of a
database. In a critical edition of a text, the critical apparatus
provides the editor with an useful tool to inform the reader of the
choices he made when reconstructing the text, providing, at the same
time, a list of possible alternatives. Should we think about something
similar in a database?
