--- 
layout: post 
title: "Medieval Data: Prospects and Practices"
date: 2015-05-13 10:00:00
---

## Session 153: Fetzer 1010
Sponsor: Institute for Medieval Studies, Univ. of New Mexico  
Organizer: Fred Gibbs, Univ. of New Mexico  
Presider: Fred Gibbs  

### Session Abstract
The notion of "medieval data” elicits perceptions easily ranging from inappropriate to ironic to utopian depending on one’s disposition. But as new digital tools and methods have gradually opened up new approaches to historical and literary analyses—just as they have slowly infiltrated blogs, seminar rooms, and academic conferences—the idea that **individual scholars can create a new kind of digital archive** of the medieval period (both at its core and extending into neighboring geographies and chronologies) seems far less fantastical than it once did. Just as the novel perspective of satellite imagery has transformed the way we think about geographic data, a much more flexible and extensible digital archive—composed of fundamentally digital data rather than digital facsimiles—holds **immense potential for unlocking novel and macroscopic perspectives on the richly interconnected medieval world.**

Yet, even as we might see ourselves on the precipice of monumental change, there is nothing inevitable about such a transformation or creation of medieval data. What are the most pressing challenges? What must we prioritize? What are the most promising ways forward? 

### Papers

*[Workflows for Medievalists with Open Data Ideals and Closed-Source Texts](/medieval-data/craig)*  
Kalani Craig, Indiana Univ.–Bloomington

*[“I sign therefore I am”: Documenting Early Medieval Medici in Italian Charters, A.D. 800–1100](/medieval-data/larpi)*  
Luca Larpi, Univ. of Manchester

*[The Archaeology of Anglo-Norman Rural Settlement in Co. Wexford, Ireland, ca. 1169–1400](/medieval-data/rancour)*  
Brittany Rancour, Univ. of Missouri–Columbia

*[Pointless Maps: Spatial Analysis with Fuzzy Data](/medieval-data/morton)*  
Amanda Morton, George Mason Univ.


Respondent: Dorothy Carr Porter, Univ. of Pennsylvania

