---
layout: syllabus
course-title: Diet, Health, Expertise
course-slug: diet-health-expertise
number: HIST 410
term: Fall 2020
section: schedule
---

# HIST 410: Week 2  

## The Long History of Dietary Advice
This week we cover medical and dietary thinking from ancient Greece and Rome through about 1700. Some of the medical thinking seems a bit bizarre to our modern sensibilities, but in terms of dietary advice, there is a remarkable consistency over the last 2000 years. So it's worth looking at the foundational thinking that has directly influenced modern nutrition, even if if certain aspects have been dramatically altered by increasingly sophisticated biochemical research.

### Mon 8/24
- Classical medicine, diet, and [Intro to Galen Lecture](https://youtu.be/9evKPqKOvUY)
- Mark Grant, _Galen: On Food and Diet_, 1-8. These few pages provide a general introduction to the classical physician Galen (died circa 215 CE) and ancient medicine. The author of the introduction has translated many of Galen's writing about food, and we'll read a excerpt from those as noted below.
- Galen, (tr. Mark Grant), _On the Humors_, 14-18; _On the Power of Foods_, 68-84. Note that there is WAY MORE DETAIL about foods in here than you need to know. Remember we're not concerned with that level of detail. Read for the big picture in terms of how Galen establishes his expertise, what topics are most interesting to him, how he thinks about the relationship between diet and health. What can you learn about medical practice in the ancient world from Galen's writing? What can you learn about how different foodstuffs differ from each other?

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Reading reflection' text="
Still getting settled: no groups for this week. Everyone will post a regular ~200 word reading reflection to address the following:

How did physicians like Galen conceive the notion of disease? According to Galen, how does diet fit into medical understandings of disease? How is his approach similar and different to modern approaches to diet? How do we make sense of Galen's writing style?﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿﻿ Your responses should also draw on both the readings and ﻿﻿﻿﻿the video lecture.
"%}


### Wed 8/26
- [Visualizing Medieval Medicine Lecture](https://youtu.be/Jre-MOGaGmw) (posted on the YouTube channel)
- Lecture Quiz (see Quizzes link on left nav of UNM Learn)


### Fri 8/28
- Ken Albala, _Eating Right in the Renaissance_, 63--77; 78--84; 91--104.

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Weekly reflection' text="
How would you characterize premodern dietary thinking? What aspects of dietary advice have persisted across the ancient, medieval, and early modern periods? What elements have been discarded? How is premodern dietary thinking inferior to our current model? It what ways might it be superior?
"%}
