---
layout: syllabus
course-title: Diet, Health, Expertise
course-slug: diet-health-expertise
number: HIST 410
term: Fall 2020
section: schedule
---

# HIST 410: Week 5
There has been no bigger shift in dietary advice than a shift to understanding health and what we eat in terms of numbers, averages, and scales. This week examines some of the earliest developments in quantification of dietary knowledge and advice. Of course we confront the implications of this paradigm shift each day as we see nutritional information labels, scales, and watch-like devices that count our number of steps each day.


## Week 5: Scientific and Quantified Eating


### Things to keep in mind this week

#### Draw connections between the emerging mechanistic body of the 1700s and the morality of diet in the early 1800s with the development of quantified nutrition in the mid to late 1800s.
This week continues to build on the mechanistic ideas about the body we saw in Cheyne; we're also continuing the moral component that we saw in Graham, except that dietary advice is no longer justified through philosophy of natural diet (or religious precepts), but through quantified nutrition. On page 56, Mudry notes that: "Distinguishing between good and bad food required an understanding of the scientific composition of various foods, the nutrients they furnished to the human body, and calculating a cost/nutrient ratio for each.” The phrase “good and bad” food is of course not just a judgment about the food, but the people who consume it.


#### Critically evaluate unintended consequences of quantified nutritional research
While there are obvious advantages to quantifying nutritional research, we should think also about unintended consequences. One of these is an unhealthy obsession with counting calories or other facets of nutrition, as many of you have noted. Another one is the fact that stuff we can’t quantify (like enjoying food) gets separated from the discourse about diet and health (and gives rise to things like food guilt). As a result, some ways of thinking about diet that might actually be extremely useful and important get sidelined in favor of knowledge that is maybe less useful but far more measurable.



#### Make explicit links between immigration, domestic science, nationalism, nutrition
We’ll read about how immigrants to the U.S. were especially targeted by dietary reformers in the early 20th century. An important social phenomenon to keep in mind is how closely food choice and cultural identity are related. It’s a bit jarring to see how immigrants’ diets were criticized ostensibly on nutritional grounds, but really because some reformers (usually upper middle class white folk) thought all the different people and customs coming into the U.S. would be socially and culturally destructive. It’s alarming (and depressing) to think about what food (or culture) in the U.S. would look like if immigrants weren’t smart enough to ignore such advice about how to “eat right".


#### Recognize the how knowledge of the invisible continued to shape the nature of medical expertise
The popularization of the calorie in the late 19th and early 20th centuries parallels the popularization of germ theory (which we don't really get into). Note here THE IMPORTANCE OF THE INVISIBLE. You can’t be a respected physicians without understanding invisible germs; you can’t be a respected nutritionist (although the actual discipline comes later) without knowing about calories (and later vitamins, etc). If this doesn’t remind you of Cheyne, you should go back and review. You can see this happening also in the hospital efficiency movement (Mudry, 54–55).


### Mon 9/14
- Jessica Mudry, “Quantifying an American Eater” _Food, Culture & Society_ 9.1 (2006): 49--67.

Prompt question: On p. 64 Mudry concludes that "after the development of the science of nutrition, moral terms like “good” and “bad” became enumerated and objectified in discussions of food."" To what extent are you convinced by her argument and evidence? The most important aspect of your reply is the ARGUMENT and EVIDENCE that YOU PROVIDE.


{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Reading Reflections' text="
- Group 1: [Comparative Reflection](reading-reflections#comparative-reflection)
- Group 2: [Prompt Reflection](reading-reflections#prompt-reflection)
- Group 3: [Response Reflection](reading-reflections#response-reflection) (remember these are due by the end of TUESDAY)
- Group 4: [Standard Reflection](reading-reflections#standard-reflection)
"%}

### Wed 9/16
- Charlotte Biltekoff, *Eating Right in America*, Chapter 2: Scientific Moralization, 13--44.

Prompt question: Today we get another look at food reformers in the early 20th century, particularly Ellen Richards, with an emphasis on the links between diet and morality. Describe the link between home economics, nutrition, and immigration. How and why did these come to intersect as according to Biltekoff (and Mudry)?

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Reading Reflections' text="
- Group 1: [Standard Reflection](reading-reflections#standard-reflection)
- Group 2: [Connective Reflection](reading-reflections#connective-reflection)
- Group 3: [Prompt Reflection](reading-reflections#prompt-reflection)
- Group 4: [Response Reflection](reading-reflections#response-reflection) (remember these are due by the end of THURSDAY)
"%}


### Fri 9/18
- Wilbur O. Atwater, “The Chemistry of Food and Nutrition: The Composition of Our Bodies and Our Food,” *Century Illustrated Magazine*, 34 (May 1887): 59--74.
Our goal with this primary source is to understand the tone of this work so often referenced in our readings this week. *Skim but don't totally skip* the science lesson details. Think about:
  - How does article reflect larger scientific currents?
  - What’s the point of all the science detail?
  - How/why does metaphor play such a prominent role in his explanations?

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Weekly reflection' text="
How does Atwater establish his credibility, authority, and expertise? Be specific! How was his approach different from Cheyne and Graham? How much do you agree with Mudry's and Biltekoff's interpretations of Atwater after reading his work for yourself?
"%}



## Natural and Moral Diets of the 1800s
The dietary advice we saw directly primarily toward the upper classes in the previous week moves into the emerging middle class in the early 19th century. In particular, physicians and moral reformers see diets changing as a result of industrialization and urbanization as a distinct societal ill. We look at how moral and dietary advice become even more tightly coupled throughout the 1800s. Later in the course, we'll see how that link has persisted into the present day.

### Mon 9/07 (Labor Day)
{% include alert.html class='info' title='Relax' text="
Nothing due today! Enjoy your virtual BBQs!!
"%}

### Tue 9/08
- BRIEF LECTURE: Mostly a review lecture with a BRIEF intro to 19th-century diet (link TBP; also via the [course YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCt6_7arYzi4TcIIwo7TLURw))

- EXTRA CREDIT Lecture quiz (via Learn as always) due WEDNESDAY NIGHT. Like the lecture, this is mostly course review, but a little bit on diet stuff for this week. This quiz is OPTIONAL. If you don't want extra points, don't take this quiz! That doesn't mean it will be easy, but the points are EXTRA.

{% include alert.html class='warning' title='Double Trouble' text="
I'm leaving the original syllabus entry for today unedited above, but I ended up making two shorter videos and corresponding quizzes, to keep things a bit more compartmentalized. So there is a [broader themes review](https://youtu.be/C6AOzfoU_sw) video and a [week 4 background and preview](https://youtu.be/TtGezq2yDBA) video. The accompanying EXTRA CREDIT quizzes are self-explanatory and in Learn as always.
"%}



{% include alert.html class='info' title='Primary Sources in Action' text="
I've uploaded [a short video](https://youtu.be/gvCk9jhLie8) that highlight a few passages from four early nineteenth-century texts. This is just to help give you a sense of some of the texts and ideas circulating about natural diet right before Graham become well known.

- William Buchan, [_Domestic Medicine_](https://books.google.com/books?id=Z7VbAAAAcAAJ) (1812).
- John Frank Newton, _[The Return to Nature](https://books.google.com/books?id=8dwhAQAAMAAJ): Or, A Defence of the Vegetable Regimen; with Some Account of an Experiment Made during the Last Three or Four Years in the Author’s Family_ (1811)
- John Ayrton Paris, _[A Treatise on Diet](https://books.google.com/books?id=xylFAAAAcAAJ) with a View to Establish ...: A System of Rules for the Prevention and Cure of Diseases Incident to a Disordered State of the Digestive Functions_ (1829).
- Charles Turner Thackrah, _[Lectures on Digestion and Diet](https://books.google.com/books?id=t9cGAAAAQAAJ)_ (1824).

"%}



### Wed 9/09
- Adam D. Shprintzen, _The Vegetarian Crusade_, Chapter 1: Proto-vegetarianism, 10-27; 32-38. This chapter briefly describes some early religious sentiments supporting vegetarianism, but most importantly (and the main reason we're reading it), it introduces Sylvester Graham and his historical context (who we'll read on Friday).


Questions to keep in mind while reading: How did Graham establish his authority as a dietary reformer? How was cholera related to his success and thinking about diet? How was Graham's argument for a meat-free diet different from the Bible Christians discussed early in the chapter?

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Reading Reflections' text="
- Group 1: [Prompt Reflection](reading-reflections#prompt-reflection)
- Group 2: [Response Reflection](reading-reflections#response-reflection) (remember these are due by the end of THURSDAY)
- Group 3: [Standard Reflection](reading-reflections#standard-reflection)
- Group 4: [Comparative Reflection](reading-reflections#comparative-reflection)
"%}


### Fri 9/11
- Sylvester Graham, [A Defence of the Graham System of Living: Or, Remarks on Diet and Regimen. Dedicated to the Rising Generation](https://books.google.com/books?id=ODRlD83ww9IC), 7--15; 88--89; 95--104.
- Sylvester Graham, [Lectures on the Science of Human Life](https://books.google.com/books?id=uBUDAAAAQAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false), preface (i-vii), and skim Table of Contents that follows. What topics stand out to you? What were you expecting to see? How is it different from what you expected?

{% include alert.html class='danger' title='Weekly reflection' text="
First, compare and contrast Graham's advice for healthy living with that of Cheyne. Be specific, but don't lose sight of the big picture! More broadly: how is the rhetoric similar to and different from what we've seen in the course so far? How is it similar to and different from our own rhetoric about a healthy diet? (To be clear: rhetoric refers to the way someone tries to persuade you of something.)
"%}
