--- 
layout: course 
title: Food, Diet, and Health
date: 2014-03-18 00:00:00 
categories: [course] 
---

What is a healthy body? How does food and diet make one? Needless to say, dietary regimens to restore or maintain health--as well as what it means to be healthy--have remained preeminent questions in Western medical history. Yet even today, medical understandings of diet and official dietary advice seems to change almost daily. This course explores how various cultural, scientific, and medical values have continually shaped our relationship to food, health, and diet from the Renaissance until now.

Some guiding questions: How and why have the perceived medical virtues of various foods (such as coffee, chocolate, booze, etc) changed over time? Why have fad diets come in and gone out of fashion? How has modern medicine continually redefined what it means to be healthy and to eat a healthy diet? How have national recommendations for healthy foods been used as social controls? How have changing attitudes about the body, health, and technology, shaped our preferences for what should be considered healthy food?

h3. Student Learning Outcomes

* Understand the changing notion of diet and the constantly shifting relationship between diet and health in Western medicine.

* Appreciate how attitudes about diet are not based on "objective" medical knowledge, but on a complex constellation of social, political, and cultural values about medicine generally.

* Develop sensitivity to how different social and cultural populations approach food and health in vastly different terms.

* Sharpen critical thinking skills by evaluating contemporary medical writing (newspaper and magazine articles) about dietary advice and exposing its assumptions and putting it in historical perspective.


h3. Work Requirements and Grading

<div>
<p>
* Everyone starts with a C in the course. I assume you are all average students who do average quality work. I know this is false, but it's my starting point. 
* You raise (or lower) your grade based on the quality of your participation in class and your submitted written work.
* Simply showing up to class doesn't count for anything; **I expect that you'll attend most classes and be an active participant in most discussions**. Given the class size, this means that you'll have a few comments or questions to contribute at least every other meeting. If you do this, you'll raise your grade one letter grade (ie C->B).
* 3 750-word review articles of websites about the Middle Ages.
* 1 1000-word Wikipedia entry on a topic of your choice.
* If your essays follow the protocols (listed below), you'll raise your grade one letter grade (ie B->A).
* If you are displeased with your grade for any assignemnt, you can visit with me about your paper, rework it, and resubmit it. You can continue to do this until we agree that your essay isn't going to improve anymore. Your final grade will reflect both your mastery of course material and your effort to improve your essay. *You cannot resubmit work without first meeting with me about your original submission and its flaws.*

</p>
</div>

h3. Assignment Protocols

<div>
<p>
* The website reviews are a critical analysis of a website or an online article about or related to the Middle Ages. You choose what to review by Googling something you're interested in. *The goal is to critically analyze your source and relate it to the course. Meeting the word count counts for nothing.* Even though you can choose your article to review, don't pick something that you can't relate to the course. Ask if you are unsure about whether an article is suitable or not.

* Your essays should be written for someone interested in but ignorant about the Middle Ages. You should (1) have a specific point that you want to make; (2) tell the reader clearly what it is; (3) use specific examples from the course readings to support your argument.

* Questions you might consider while thinking about your source: How does the article portray the Middle Ages? Does it offer a fair assessment or characterization? What are it's sources? Are its claims supported by historical evidence? Is the article trustworthy? Does it make an interesting and worthwhile point? How does it compare to what we've read about the topic?

* Your Wikipedia article, which serves as your final exam, will be written in stages over the last quarter of the course. You are not writing a potential article, but a very real one that will be published for all the world to read. Ample guidance about this process will be provided as the end of the semester nears.

* **Final articles must be posted online by 9:30am on May 14.**

</p>
</div>


h3. Keys to Success 

<div>
<p>
* The reading load for the course is relatively heavy, usually about 20-30 pages per meeting. Do not get bogged down in details; read for the main point of the article and get a sense of the evidence that the author uses to make the point. The readings will challenge you, but will greatly reward you for putting in the time and effort. **Your thinking and writing will improve noticeably by the end of the semester.**

* This is **not** a lecture class; I expect that you'll come ready to discuss the assigned reading. It is common to be shy about speaking in front of your peers, to find it difficult to listen and think on the fly, and to worry about sounding stupid. These are all perfectly natural concerns, but they can be overcome only with practice. I can't think of any successful people who are afraid to join a conversation.

* Participation is not limited to answering my questions; it also means offering alternative viewpoints, interpretations, and asking questions about readings and the ongoing discussion. If you come to class with some questions, you'll always have an easy way to get involved.

* **This course emphasizes historical thinking and analysis over regurgitating information.** This means that your review essays should draw heavily from the themes of our discussions. You cannot write good essays from the reading assignments alone, nor can you write good essays without referencing relevant passages in the readings. Both of these should be easy if you're putting in a sustained effort throughout the course. If you try to write an essay at the last minute, you will fail, and will have to redo the assignment.

* **Do not suffer in silence.** I try to situate discussions and assignments squarely within the objectives of the course, but I expect that you'll ask for clarification if such connections elude you.

* If you have questions about your performance / grade during the semester, I will be very happy to meet with you to discuss how things are going. If, therefore, you feel uncertainty about your grade, it's your own fault. 

* Please note that I understand that everyone comes into the course with different backgrounds, skills, and experience. **Serious effort goes a long way toward your grade!** 

</p>
</div>

<div id="syllabus">

<div class="schedule">

h2. Schedule of Readings


<div class="dateicon"><p>23<span>Jan</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Course introduction and logistics

*   course goals: history, medicine, and critical thinking
*   website for syllabus, assignments, announcements, etc
*   weekly writing assignments and critiques
*   final projects and presentations
*   survey of course topics
</div>



<div class="dateicon"><p>28<span>Jan</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Classical Medicine and Dietetics

* Ludwig Edelstein, "The Dietetics of Antiquity," in Edelstein, _Ancient Medicine: Selected Papers of Ludwig Edelstein_, eds. Owsei  Temkin and C. Lilian Temkin (Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins Press, 1967), 303-316.
* Selections from Mark Grant (trans.), _Galen on Food and Diet_, 1-13; 14-18; 46-60; 68-83.

</div>



<div class="dateicon"><p>30<span>Jan</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Herbals, simples, plant remedies

*   "Foreward" (by John Scarborough) and "Introduction" to John Riddle, _Dioscorides On Pharmacy and Medicine_ (Austin: Univeristy of Texas Press), xi-xiv and xvii-xxviii.
*   Jerry Stannard, “Alimentary and Medicinal Uses of Plants" (69-91) and Carmélia Opsomer-Halleux, "The Garden's Role in Medicine" (95-105) both in _Medieval Gardens_, ed. Elisabeth MacDougall (Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, 1986).
*   "Ancient Pills Found in Shipwreck Offer Rare Insight into Early Medicine"

</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>4<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Medieval Food and Diet

* Massimo Montanari, _The Culture of Food_, 1-37.
* "Regimen of Health from Salerno":http://books.google.com/books?id=FKs-AAAAYAAJ&dq=Sir+John+Harington,+The+School+of+Salernum:+Regimen+Sanitatis+Salerni&source=gbs_navlinks_s (composed 12th cen.; this English edition is from 1607), 75-156 (actual reading is about 1/3 of this total).
</div>


<div class="dateicon"><p>6<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Spices

*   Jean-Louis Flandrin, "Seasoning, Cooking, and Dietetics in the Late Middle Ages," 313-326.
*   Terrance Scully, “The Sickdish in Early French Recipes,” in _Health, Disease and Healing in Medieval Culture_ (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1992), 132–140.

<!--*   Maguelonne Toussaint-Samat, “Spice at any Price” in _History of Food_, 480-545. -->
</div>


<div class="dateicon"><p>11<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Religious Diets

*   Carol Walker Bynum, _Holy Feast and Holy Fast_, 189-259 (chapters 6,7,8)
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>13<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Alchemy and aqua vitae

*   Stanton J. Linden, _The Alchemy Reader_, 1-23.
*   Faye Marie Getz, “To Prolong Life and Promote Health. Baconian Alchemy and Pharmacy in the English Learned Tradition,” in _Health, Disease and Healing in Medieval Culture_, 141–151.
*   T. Sarah Peterson, _Acquired Taste_, 15-41.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>18<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Early Modern Diet

*   Ken Albala, _Eating Right in the Renaissance_, 48-114.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>20<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Distilling Health

*   B. Ann Tlusty, “Water of life, water of death: The controversy over brandy and gin in early modern Augsburg,” _Central European History_ 1998 31(1-2): 1-26.
*   Ambroise Parey, "_The Works of that famous Chirurgion..._":http://books.google.com/books?id=TzVbqmHLfGMC&dq=Ambroise+Parey,+The+Works+of+that+famous+Chirurgion&source=gbs_navlinks_s, Trans. Thomas Johnson (London: Richard Cotes and W. Dugard, 1649), 735-752 (= Book 27, "Of Distillations"). Read lightly to get a sense of the images, descriptions, and how this compares to our alchemical readings.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>25<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  New Worlds, New Tastes

*   Brian Cowan, "New Worlds, New Tastes: Food Fashions After the Renaissance," in _Food: The History of Taste_, ed. Paul Freedman (Berkeley: Univ. of California Press, 2007), 196-231.
*   Rudi Matthee, "Exotic Substances: The introduction and global spread of tobacco, coffee, tea, and distilled liquor, 16th to 18th centuries,” in _Drugs and Narcotics in History_, ed. Roy Porter, 24-51.
</div>


<div class="dateicon"><p>27<span>Feb</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Gastronomy and Coffee Houses

*   Steve Pincus, "'Coffee Politicians Does Create': Coffee Houses and Restoration Political Culture,” _Journal of Modern History_ 67 (December, 1995): 807-834.
*   Jean-Louise Flandrin, "From Dietetics to Gastronomy: The Liberation of the Gourmet," 418-432.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>04<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Chocolate

*   Marcy Norton, “Conquests of Chocolate,” _Magazine of History_ 18, no. 3 (2004): 14–17.
*   Marcy Norton, “Tasting Empire: Chocolate and the European Internalization of Mesoamerican Aesthetics,” _The American Historical Review_ 111, no. 3 (2006): 660–691.
*   [SKIM ONLY] Teresa L. Dillinger ... [et al.] “Food for the Gods : cure for humanity? : a cultural history of the medicinal and ritual use of chocolate,” _Journal of Nutrition_ Vol. 130 (2000): 2057-2072.
*   REVIEW ESSAY #1 DUE
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>06<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Sugar and Empire

*   NO CLASS --- HAVE A NICE BREAK! (but read these eventually; assignments still due)
*   James Walvin, “A Taste of Empire, 1600-1800,” _History Today_ 47, no. 1 (1997): 11–16.
*   Woodruff D. Smith, “Complications of the Commonplace; Tea, Sugar, and Imperialism,” _Journal of Interdisciplinary History_ v. 23, Autumn 1992: 259-78.
</div>


h3.  SPRING BREAK (3/11 - 3/17)

<p>

<div class="dateicon"><p>18<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Wine

*   Christopher Hoolihan, "Wine and Regimen from Hippocrates to the Renaissance," _Caduceus_ 9.1 (1993): 5-15*   Harry W. Paul, Chapter 2 from _Bacchic Medicine: Wine and Alcohol Therapies from Napoleon to the French Paradox_, 25-55.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>20<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Enlightened Diets

*   Steven Shapin, “Trusting George Cheyne: Scientific Expertise, Common Sense, and Moral Authority in Early Eighteenth-Century Dietetic Medicine,” _Bulletin of the History of Medicine_, 77 (2003): 263-297.
*   George Cheyne, "_An Essay on Regimen_":http://books.google.com/books?id=ezswAAAAYAAJ&printsec=frontcover&source=gbs_ge_summary_r&cad=0#v=onepage&q&f=false (London, 1740), 53-62.
*   SKIM ONLY: J. Worth Estes, "The Medical Properties of Food in the Eighteenth Century,” _Journal of the History of Medicine and Allied Sciences_, 51 (1996): 127-149.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>25<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  National Diets

*   T. Bickham, “Eating the Empire: Intersections of Food, Cookery and Imperialism in Eighteenth-century Britain,” </i>Past &amp; Present</i> 198, no. 1 (2008): 71–109.
*   Rachel Laudan and Jeffrey M. Pilcher, “Chiles, chocolate and race in the New Spain,” _Eighteenth Century Life_ 23 (May 1999): 59-70.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>27<span>Mar</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Early American Diet

*   [SKIM ONLY] Alice Ross, “Health and Diet in 19th-Century America: A Food Historian’s Point of View,” _Historical Archaeology_ 27, no. 2 (January 1, 1993): 42–56
*   Harvey Levenstein, _Revolution at the Table: The Transformation of the American Diet_ (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003), 44-85.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>01<span>Apr</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Fad Dieting (1/2)

*   Hillel Schwartz, _Never Satisfied. A Cultural History of Diets, Fantasies, and Fat,_ 75-187.
</div>


<div class="dateicon"><p>03<span>Apr</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Fad Dieting (2/2)

*   Hillel Schwartz, _Never Satisfied. A Cultural History of Diets, Fantasies, and Fat,_ 237-339.
</div>

<div class="dateicon"><p>08<span>Apr</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Vitamins

*   Rima D Apple, "'They Need It Now': Science, Advertising and Vitamins, 1925-1940," _Journal of Popular Culture_ 22, no. 3 (1988): 65–83.
*   Wilbur O. Atwater, “The Chemistry of Food and Nutrition: The Composition of Our Bodies and Our Food,” "_Century Illustrated Magazine_":http://books.google.com/books?id=2WoiAQAAIAAJ&printsec=frontcover&dq=editions:LCCN04012667&lr=#v=onepage&q&f=false 34 (May 1887): 59-74.
*   REVIEW ESSAY #2 DUE
</div>


<div class="dateicon"><p>10<span>Apr</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Engineering Food

*   Mark Tester, "The dangerously polarized debate on genetic modification." _British Food Journal_ 103.11 (2001): 785-790.
*   Alison Shaw, "‘It Just Goes against the Grain’: Public Understandings of Genetically Modified (GM) Food in the UK.” _Public Understanding of Science_ 11.3 (2002): 273-291.
*   Ellen Messer, “Food Systems and Dietary Perspective: Are Genetically Modified Organisms the Best Way to Ensure Nutritionally Adequate Food?,” _Indiana Journal of Global Legal Studies_ 9, no. 1 (October 1, 2001): 65–90.
</div>



<div class="dateicon"><p>15<span>Apr</span></div>
<div class="day">

h4.  Learning to Eat

*   Michael Pollan, _In Defense of Food_
</div>

